وفـي هذا الكلام متروك استغنـي بدلالة ما ذُكر عما ترك ، وهو : فـيقال : احشروا الذين ظلـموا ، ومعنى ذلك اجمعوا الذين كفروا بـالله فـي الدنـيا وعصوه وأزواجهم وأشياعهم علـى ما كانوا علـيه من الكفر بـالله وما كانوا يعبدون من دون الله من الآلهة . وبنـحو الذي قلنا فـي ذلك قال أهل التأويـل . ذكر من قال ذلك : حدثنا ابن بشار ، قال : ثنا عبد الرحمن ، قال : ثنا سفـيان ، عن سماك بن حرب ، عن النعمان بن بشير عن عمر بن الـخطاب { احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَـمُوا وأزْوَاجَهُمْ } قال : ضُرَبـاءهم . حدثنـي علـيّ ، قال : ثنا أبو صالـح ، قال : ثنـي معاوية ، عن علـيّ ، عن ابن عبـاس { احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَـمُوا وأزْوَاجَهُمْ } يقول : نظراءهم . حدثنـي مـحمد بن سعد ، قال : ثنـي أبـي ، قال : ثنـي عمي ، قال : ثنـي أبـي ، عن أبـيه ، عن ابن عبـاس قوله : { احْشَرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَـمُوا وأزْوَاجَهُمْ } يعنـي : أتبـاعهم ، ومن أشبههم من الظلـمة . حدثنا مـحمد بن الـمثنى ، قال : ثنا ابن أبـي عديّ ، عن داود ، قال : سألت أبـا العالـية ، عن قول الله : { احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَـمُوا وأزْوَاجَهُمْ وَما كانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللّهِ } قال : الذين ظلـموا وأشياعهم . حدثنا ابن الـمثنى ، قال : ثنـي عبد الأعلـى ، قال : ثنا داود ، عن أبـي العالـية ، أنه قال فـي هذه الآية { احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَـمُوا وأزْوَاجَهُمْ } قال : وأشياعهم . حدثنـي يعقوب بن إبراهيـم ، قال : ثنا ابن علـية ، قال : ثنا داود ، عن أبـي العالـية مثله . حدثنا بشر ، قال : ثنا يزيد ، قال : ثنا سعيد ، عن قتادة ، قوله : { احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَـمُوا وأزْوَاجَهُمْ } : أي وأشياعهم الكفـار مع الكفـار . حدثنـي مـحمد بن الـحسين ، قال : ثنا أحمد بن الـمفضل ، قال : ثنا أسبـاط ، عن السدّيِّ ، فـي قوله : { احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَـمُوا وأزْوَاجَهُمْ } قال : وأشبـاههم . حدثنـي يونس ، قال : أخبرنا ابن وهب ، قال : قال ابن زيد ، فـي قوله : { احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَـمُوا وأزْوَاجَهُمْ } قال : أزواجهم فـي الأعمال ، وقرأ : { وكُنْتُـمْ أزْوَاجاً ثَلاثَةً فَأصحَابُ الـمَيْـمَنَةِ ما أصحَابُ الـمَيْـمَنَةِ وأصحَابُ الـمَشأَمَةِ ما أصحَابُ الـمَشْأمةِ وَالسَّابِقُونَ السَّابِقُونَ } فـالسابقون زوج وأصحاب الـميـمنة زوج ، وأصحاب الشمال زوج ، قال : كلّ من كان من هذا حشره الله معه . وقرأ : { وَإذَا النُّفُوسُ زُوّجَتْ } قال : زوّجت علـى الأعمال ، لكل واحد من هؤلاء زوج ، زوّج الله بعض هؤلاء بعضاً زوّج أصحاب الـيـمين أصحاب الـيـمين ، وأصحاب الْـمشأمة أصحابَ الـمشأمة ، والسابقـين السابقـين ، قال : فهذا قوله : { احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَـمُوا وأزْوَاجَهُمْ } قال : أزواج الأعمال التـي زوّجهن الله . حدثنـي مـحمد بن عمرو ، قال : ثنا أبو عاصم ، قال : ثنا عيسى وحدثنـي الـحارث ، قال : ثنا الـحسن ، قال : ثنا ورقاء ، جميعاً عن ابن أبـي نـجيح ، عن مـجاهد ، قوله : { وأزْوَاجَهُم } ْ قال : أمثالهم . وقوله : { وَما كانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللّهِ فـاهْدُوهُمْ إلـى صِراطِ الـجَحِيـمِ } يقول تعالـى ذكره : احشروا هؤلاء الـمشركين وآلهتهم التـي كانوا يعبدونها من دون الله ، فوجِّهوهم إلـى طريق الـجحيـم . وبنـحو الذي قلنا فـي ذلك قال أهل التأويـل . ذكر من قال ذلك : حدثنا بشر ، قال : ثنا يزيد ، قال : ثنا سعيد ، عن قتادة { وَما كانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللّهِ } الأصنام . حدثنـي علـيّ ، قال : ثنا أبو صالـح ، قال : ثنـي معاوية ، عن علـيّ ، عن ابن عبـاس ، قوله : { فـاهدوهمْ إلـى صِراطِ الـجَحِيـمِ } يقول : وجِّهوهم ، وقـيـل : إن الـجحيـم البـاب الرابع من أبواب النار .

In this discourse, it is left to infer from what has been mentioned what was omitted. It is said: "Gather those who have wronged," and the meaning of this is to gather those who disbelieved in Allah in this world, disobeyed Him, and their spouses and followers, according to their disbelief in Allah and what they used to worship besides Allah from idols. In the same manner, the people of interpretation have said.

It is mentioned who said this: Ibn Bashar narrated to us, he said: Abdul Rahman narrated to us, he said: Sufyan narrated to us, from Simak bin Harb, from Al-Nu'man bin Bashir, from Umar bin Al-Khattab, regarding the verse {Gather those who have wronged and their spouses} he said: Their peers. Ali narrated to me, he said: Abu Salih narrated to us, he said: Mu'awiyah narrated to us, from Ali, from Ibn Abbas, regarding the verse {Gather those who have wronged and their spouses} he said: Their equals. Muhammad bin Sa'd narrated to me, he said: My father narrated to us, he said: My uncle narrated to us, he said: My father narrated to us, from his father, from Ibn Abbas, regarding his saying: {Gather those who have wronged and their spouses} he means: Their followers and those who resemble them among the wrongdoers. Muhammad bin Al-Muthanna narrated to us, he said: Ibn Abi Adi narrated to us, from Dawud, he said: I asked Abu Al-Aliyah about Allah's saying: {Gather those who have wronged and their spouses and what they used to worship besides Allah} he said: Those who wronged and their followers. Ibn Al-Muthanna narrated to us, he said: Abdul A'la narrated to us, he said: Dawud narrated to us, from Abu Al-Aliyah, that he said regarding this verse {Gather those who have wronged and their spouses} he said: And their followers. Ya'qub bin Ibrahim narrated to me, he said: Ibn Aliya narrated to us, he said: Dawud narrated to us, from Abu Al-Aliyah similarly. Bishr narrated to us, he said: Yazid narrated to us, he said: Sa'id narrated to us, from Qatada, regarding his saying: {Gather those who have wronged and their spouses} he said: Their followers, the disbelievers with the disbelievers. Muhammad bin Al-Husayn narrated to me, he said: Ahmad bin Al-Mufaddal narrated to us, he said: Asbat narrated to us, from Al-Suddi, regarding his saying: {Gather those who have wronged and their spouses} he said: And their likes. Yunus narrated to me, he said: Ibn Wahb informed us, he said: Ibn Zayd said regarding his saying: {Gather those who have wronged and their spouses} he said: Their spouses in deeds, and he recited: {And you were three groups, so the People of the Right - what are the People of the Right? And the People of the Left - what are the People of the Left? And the Foremost are the Foremost} so the Foremost are a group, and the People of the Right are a group, and the People of the Left are a group, he said: Allah will gather each of these with their group. And he recited: {And when the souls are paired} he said: Paired according to their deeds, each one of these has a spouse, Allah paired some of these with others, He paired the People of the Right with the People of the Right, and the People of the Left with the People of the Left, and the Foremost with the Foremost, he said: This is His saying: {Gather those who have wronged and their spouses} he said: The spouses of the deeds that Allah paired them with. Muhammad bin Amr narrated to me, he said: Abu Asem narrated to us, he said: Isa narrated to us, and Al-Harith narrated to me, he said: Al-Hasan narrated to us, he said: Warqa narrated to us, all from Ibn Abi Najih, from Mujahid, regarding his saying: {And their spouses} he said: Their likes. And his saying: {And what they used to worship besides Allah, so guide them to the path of Hell} He, the Exalted, says: Gather these polytheists and their idols that they used to worship besides Allah, and direct them to the path of Hell. In the same manner, the people of interpretation have said.

It is mentioned who said this: Bishr narrated to us, he said: Yazid narrated to us, he said: Sa'id narrated to us, from Qatada, regarding {And what they used to worship besides Allah} the idols. Ali narrated to me, he said: Abu Salih narrated to us, he said: Mu'awiyah narrated to us, from Ali, from Ibn Abbas, regarding his saying: {So guide them to the path of Hell} he said: Direct them, and it is said that Hell is the fourth gate of the gates of the Fire.