,original_sentence,translation
0,ثم شبههن ببيض النعام المكنون في وكناتها، وذلك لأن فيها بياضاً يشوبه قليل من الصفرة، وإذا كانت مستورة في أماكنها كانت مصونة عن الغبرة والتغير فكانت في غاية الحسن، وبها تشبه العرب النساء وتسميهن بيضات الخدور.,"Then He likened them to ostrich eggs hidden in their nests, because they have whiteness with a little yellow, and when they are concealed in their places, they are protected from dust and change, so they are at the peak of beauty, and with them the Arabs liken women and call them the eggs of the tents."
1,{كَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَّكْنُونٌ} تفسير بعضهم يعني بالبيض اللؤلؤ كقوله {وَحُورٌ عِينٌ * كَأَمْثَالِ ٱللُّؤْلُؤِ} [الواقعة: 22 - 23] مكنون في أصدافه.,"As if they were hidden pearls. Some interpret the pearls as pearls, as His saying, ""And fair women with wide, lovely eyes, as if they were hidden pearls"" [Al-Waqiah: 22-23], hidden in their shells."
2,وقوله {كأنهن بيض مكنون} البيض معروف وهو اسم جنس واحدته بيضة والمكنون هو المستور بالادخار قيل المراد تشبيههن بالبيض الذي كنه الريش في العش أو غيره في غيره فلم تمسه الأيدي ولم يصبه الغبار، وقيل المراد تشبيههن ببطن البيض قبل أن يقشّر وقبل أن تمسه الأيدي.,"His saying, ""As if they are hidden eggs,"" the eggs are known and it is a generic name, its singular is an egg, and the hidden is what is stored away. It was said that the intention is to liken them to eggs that are hidden by feathers in the nest or elsewhere, so hands have not touched them and dust has not affected them. It was also said that the intention is to liken them to the inside of the eggs before they are peeled and before hands have touched them."
3,وقال الحسن هنّ الشديدات بياض العين الشديدات سوادها.,"He said, ""They are those with very white eyes and very black pupils."""
4,والأوّل أولى {كَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَّكْنُونٌ} قال الحسن، وأبو زيد شبههنّ ببيض النعام تكنها النعامة بالريش من الريح، والغبار.,"""The first is more appropriate {as if they were eggs well-protected}. Al-Hasan and Abu Zayd likened them to ostrich eggs, which the ostrich covers with feathers from the wind and dust."""
5,فلونه أبيض في صفرة، وهو أحسن ألوان النساء.,"Its color is white with a hint of yellow, and it is the best color for women."
6,وقال سعيد بن جبير، والسدّي شبههنّ ببطن البيض قبل أن يقشر، وتمسه الأيدي، وبه قال ابن جرير، ومنه قول امرىء القيس وبيضة خدر لا يرام خباؤها تمتعت من لهو بها غير معجل قال المبرد وتقول العرب إذا وصفت الشيء بالحسن، والنظافة كأنه بيض النعام المغطى بالريش.,"Sa'id bin Jubayr and As-Suddi likened them to the belly of eggs before being peeled and touched by hands. Ibn Jarir said the same, and from this is the saying of Imru' al-Qays: ""And a maiden in her chamber, her tent cannot be approached, I enjoyed her play without haste."" Al-Mubarrid said, ""The Arabs say when describing something as beautiful and clean, as if it were ostrich eggs covered with feathers."""
7,وقيل المكنون المصون عن الكسر، أي إنهنّ عذارى، وقيل المراد بالبيض اللؤلؤ كما في قوله {وَحُورٌ عِينٌ * كَأَمْثَـٰلِ ٱللُّؤْلُؤِ ٱلْمَكْنُونِ} الواقعة 22، 23 ومثله قول الشاعر وهي بيضاء مثل لؤلؤة الغوّا ص ميزت من جوهر مكنون والأوّل أولى، وإنما قال {مكنون}، ولم يقل مكنونات لأنه وصف البيض باعتبار اللفظ.,"It is said that the hidden and protected from breaking, meaning that they are virgins. It is also said that the white refers to pearls, as in His saying, ""And fair women with large, lovely eyes, like hidden pearls"" (Al-Waqi'ah 22, 23). Similarly, the poet said, ""She is white like a pearl of the deep sea, distinguished from a hidden essence."" The first interpretation is more appropriate. He said ""hidden"" and not ""hidden ones"" because he described the white in terms of the singular form."
8,وأخرج ابن جرير، وابن المنذر، وابن أبي حاتم، والبيهقي في البعث عنه أيضاً في قوله {وَعِندَهُمْ قَـٰصِرٰتُ ٱلطَّرْفِ} يقول من غير أزواجهنّ {كَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَّكْنُونٌ} قال اللؤلؤ المكنون.,"""And Ibn Jarir, Ibn al-Mundhir, Ibn Abi Hatim, and al-Bayhaqi in al-Ba'th also narrated from him regarding His saying, {And with them are those restrained in glance} [52:18], he said: 'From other than their husbands.' {As if they were eggs, well-protected} [52:23], he said: 'The protected pearl.'"""
9,وأخرج ابن المنذر عنه في قوله {كَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَّكْنُونٌ} قال بياض البيضة ينزع عنها فوفها، وغشاؤها.,"""And Ibn al-Mundhir narrated from him regarding His saying, 'As if they were eggs carefully guarded,' he said: 'The whiteness of the egg, when its shell and membrane are removed.'"""
10,7 - التشبيه المرسل والمجمل {كَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَّكْنُونٌ} حذف منه وجه الشبه فأصبح مجملاً.,"7 - The unrestricted and summarized simile {As if they were hidden eggs} the similarity aspect was omitted, so it became summarized."
