,original_sentence,translation
0,يقال: غاله يغوله غولاً إذا أهلكه وافسده، وفيه تعريض بخمر الدنيا ولهذا قدم الظرف وبنى الكلام على الاسم في قوله {ولا هم عنها ينزفون} أي يسكرون.,"It is said: ""Ghala yughulu ghulan"" if he destroys and corrupts it, and it is an allusion to the wine of this world. That is why the preposition was presented and the sentence was built on the noun in His saying, ""And they will not be intoxicated from it."""
1,يقال: نزف الشارب على البناء للمفعول إذا ذهب عقله.,"It is said: The drinker is said to be ""نزف"" (nazafa) when his mind is gone."
2,وأنزف مثله ومعناه صار ذا نزف.,"And I bleed like him, and its meaning has become bleeding."
3,ومن قرأ {يُنزَفُونَ} بكسر الزاي فهو من أنزف القوم إذا حان منهم النزف وهو السكر كما يقال أحصد الزرع إذا حان حصاده وأقطف الكرم إذا حان قطافه.,"And whoever reads {يُنزَفُونَ} with the zay broken, it is from ""أنزف القوم"" when they are about to be intoxicated, as it is said, ""أحصد الزرع"" when the harvest is due, and ""أقطف الكرم"" when the grape harvest is due."
4,وقوله {لا فيها غول ولا هم عنها ينزفون} الغول الإِضرار والإِفساد، قال الراغب الغول إهلاك الشيء من حيث لا يحس به انتهى.,"""His saying {Therein is no intoxication, nor do they become intoxicated from it}"" The meaning of ""ghoul"" is harm and corruption. Al-Raghib said, ""Ghoul means the destruction of something without one being aware of it."""
5,وقال أبو عبيدة الغول أن تغتال عقولهم، وأنشد قول مطيع بن إياس وما زالت الكأس تغتالهم وتذهب بالأوّل الأوّل وقال الواحدي الغول حقيقته الإهلاك، يقال غاله غولاً، واغتاله، أي أهلكه، والغول كل ما اغتالك، أي أهلكك.,"Abu Ubayda al-Ghul said, ""To destroy their minds,"" and he recited the words of Mutay' ibn Iyas, ""And the cup has been destroying them and taking away the first one after the first."" Al-Wahidi said, ""The true meaning of al-Ghul is destruction. It is said, 'Ghala ghulan,' and 'Ightala,' meaning 'he destroyed him.' And al-Ghul is everything that destroys you."""
6,قال الفراء من كسر الزاي، فله معنيان، يقال أنزف الرجل إذا فنيت خمره، وأنزف إذا ذهب عقله من السكر، وتحمل هذه القراءة على معنى لا ينفد شرابهم لزيادة الفائدة.,"Al-Farra' said, ""Whoever breaks the letter 'zay' (ز), there are two meanings. It is said that 'the man has been depleted' (أنزف) if his wine has run out, and 'he has been depleted' (أنزف) if his mind has gone due to intoxication. This reading is interpreted to mean that their drink will not run out, for increased benefit."""
7,قال المهدوي لا يكون معنى ينزفون يسكرون، لأن قبله {لاَ فِيهَا غَوْلٌ} أي لا تغتال عقولهم، فيكون تكريراً، وهذا يقوّي ما قاله قتادة إن الغول وجع البطن، وكذا روى ابن أبي نجيح عن مجاهد.,"He said, ""Al-Mahdawi said that the meaning of 'they will not be intoxicated' is not 'they will be intoxicated,' because before it is {there is no intoxication in it}, meaning it does not impair their minds, so it would be a repetition. This strengthens what Qatada said that intoxication is abdominal pain, and similarly, Ibn Abi Najih narrated from Mujahid."""
8,ويؤيد هذا أن أصل الغول الفساد الذي يلحق في خفاء، يقال اغتاله اغتيالاً إذا أفسد عليه أمره في خفية، ومنه الغول، والغيلة القتل خفية.,"This is supported by the fact that the origin of the word ""ghoul"" refers to corruption that occurs in secret. It is said, ""He assassinated him"" (aghtala huwa) if he corrupted his matter in secret. From this comes the word ""ghoul"" and ""ghila,"" which means killing in secret."
