,original_sentence,translation
0,واشتدّ وصف الخمر بما يوصف به الماء لأنها تجري في الجنة في أنهار كما يجري الماء.,"The description of wine is intensified by what water is described with, because it flows in the paradise in rivers as water flows."
1,وخص هذا الوصف بالذكر لأنه أعظم المفاسد في شرب الخمر.,This description is specifically mentioned because it is the greatest evil in drinking alcohol.
2,وعن بعضهم أن معنى قوله {ولا هم عنها ينزفون} هو أن الشراب لا ينقطع عنهم لئلا يلزم نوع من التكرار.,"And some of them said that the meaning of His saying {And they will not be intoxicated therefrom} is that the drink will not be cut off from them, lest there be a kind of repetition."
3,فنفي الغول عن الخمر نفي مضارها والإِنزاف فسر بالسكر المذهب للعقل وأصله إذهاب الشيء تدريجاً.,"The denial of the demon in wine is the denial of its harms, and intoxication is interpreted as the loss of reason, and its origin is the gradual removal of a thing."
4,ومحصل المعنى أنه ليس فيها مضار الخمر التي في الدنيا ولا إسكارها بإذهاب العقل.,The meaning is that it does not have the harms of the wine of this world nor does it intoxicate by removing the mind.
5,ثم وصف هذه الكأس من الخمر بغير ما يتصف به خمر الدنيا، فقال {لاَ فِيهَا غَوْلٌ} أي لا تغتال عقولهم، فتذهب بها، ولا يصيبهم منها مرض، ولا صداع {وَلاَ هُمْ عَنْهَا يُنزَفُونَ} أي يسكرون، يقال نزف الشارب، فهو منزوف، ونزيف إذا سكر، ومنه قول امرىء القيس وإذا هي تمشي كمشي النزيـ ـف يصرعه بالكثيب البهر وقال أيضاً نزيف إذا قامت لوجه تمايلت ومنه قول الآخر فلثمت فاها آخذاً بقرونها شرب النزيف ببرد ماء الحشرج قال الفراء العرب تقول ليس فيها غيلة، وغائلة، وغول سواء.,"Then he described this cup of wine as being different from the wine of this world, saying, ""There is no intoxication in it"" meaning it does not take away their minds, nor does it cause them any sickness or headache, ""nor are they made to stagger from it"" meaning they do not get drunk. It is said that a drinker is intoxicated, so he is intoxicated and drunk if he gets drunk. From this is the saying of Imru' al-Qays: ""And when she walks like the walk of the intoxicated, she is felled by the dune of the wind."" He also said: ""Intoxicated when she stands up, she sways."" And from the saying of another: ""I kissed her mouth, taking hold of her horns, drinking the intoxicated with the cold water of Al-Hashrij."" Al-Farra said: The Arabs say there is no deceit, no harm, and no intoxication in it, all are the same."
6,قال النحاس والقراءة الأولى أبين، وأصحّ في المعنى لأن معنى {لا ينزفون} عند جمهور المفسرين لا تذهب عقولهم، فنفى الله عزّ وجلّ عن خمر الجنة الآفات التي تلحق في الدنيا من خمرها من الصداع، والسكر.,"The grammarian said, ""The first reading is clearer and more accurate in meaning, because the meaning of {they do not become intoxicated} according to the majority of the interpreters is that their minds do not go away. So, God Almighty negated from the wine of Paradise the afflictions that occur in this world from its wine, such as headache and intoxication."""
7,وأخرج ابن جرير، وابن المنذر، وابن أبي حاتم، والبيهقي في البعث عن ابن عباس في قوله {يُطَافُ عَلَيْهِمْ بِكَأْسٍ مّن مَّعِينٍ} قال الخمر {لاَ فِيهَا غَوْلٌ} قال ليس فيها صداع {وَلاَ هُمْ عَنْهَا يُنزَفُونَ} قال لا تذهب عقولهم.,"""And Ibn Jarir, Ibn al-Mundhir, Ibn Abi Hatim, and al-Bayhaqi in al-Ba'th narrated from Ibn Abbas regarding the statement {They will be served with a cup of flowing wine} [Qur'an 37:45-47], he said, 'Wine,' {no ill-effects in it} he said, 'No headache,' {nor will they be intoxicated} he said, 'Their minds will not be lost.'"""
8,وأخرج ابن أبي حاتم، وابن مردويه عنه قال في الخمر أربع خصال السكر، والصداع، والقيء، والبول، فنزّه الله خمر الجنة عنها، فقال {لاَ فِيهَا غَوْلٌ} لا تغول عقولهم من السكر {وَلاَ هُمْ عَنْهَا يُنزَفُونَ} قال يقيئون عنها كما يقيء صاحب خمر الدنيا عنها.,"""And Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Marduwaih narrated from him that he said about wine: 'It has four characteristics: intoxication, headache, vomiting, and urination. So, Allah has purified the wine of Paradise from these, saying, 'There is no intoxication in it' - it does not intoxicate their minds - 'nor are they made to vomit from it' - just as the drinker of worldly wine vomits from it."""
9,وأخرج ابن جرير، عن ابن عباس {لاَ فِيهَا غَوْلٌ} قال هي الخمر ليس فيها وجع بطن.,"""And Ibn Jarir narrated from Ibn Abbas: 'There is no harm in it' (Quran 37:47) he said, 'It is wine, in which there is no abdominal pain.'"""
