,original_sentence,translation
0,والقول الأول اقوى بدليل فاء التعقيب ولإطلاق قوله {خلقنا} إكتفاء ببيان ما تقدمه كأنه قال: خلقنا كذا وكذا من عجائب الخلق، فاستخبرهم أهم أشد خلقاً أم هذه الخلائق، ومن هان عليه هذه كان خلق البشر بل إعادته عليه أهون.,"The first saying is stronger because of the letter ""fa"" which indicates consequence, and because of the generality of His saying, ""We created,"" being content with the explanation of what preceded it, as if He said: ""We created such and such of the wonders of creation, so ask them, are they stronger in creation or these creatures? And whoever finds this easy, then the creation of mankind, rather its resurrection, is even easier for Him."""
1,{فَٱسْتَفْتِهِمْ} فسلهم، يعني: أهل مكة {أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقاً أَم مَّنْ خَلَقْنَآ} يعني: من الأُمم الخالية، وقد أهلكناهم بذنوبهم، وقيل: يعني السماوات والأرض وما بينهما.,"""Then ask them,"" meaning: the people of Mecca, ""Are they more difficult to create, or those whom We have created?"" meaning: the previous nations, whom We have destroyed due to their sins. It has also been said: meaning the heavens, the earth, and what is between them."
2,نزلت في أبي الأسد بن كلدة، وقيل: أُبيّ بن أسد، وسُمّي بالأسدين؛ لشدة بطشه وقوته، نظيرها: {لَخَلْقُ ٱلسَّمَاوَاتِ وَٱلأَرْضِ أَكْـبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ ٱلنَّاسِ} [غافر: 57] وقوله سبحانه {أَأَنتُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقاً أَمِ ٱلسَّمَآءُ} [النازعات: 27].,"It was revealed about Abi Al-Asad bin Kalda, and it was said: Ubayy bin Asad, and he was named Al-Asadin; for his extreme severity and strength, similar to: {The creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind} [Ghafir: 57] and His saying, may He be glorified: {Are you the most difficult to create or the heaven?} [An-Naziat: 27]."
3,قوله تعالى: {فاسْتَفْتِهِمْ} أي: فَسَْلهُمْ سؤالَ تقرير {أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقاً} أي: أَحْكَمُ صَنْعةً {أَمْ مَنْ خَلَقْنَا} فيه قولان: أحدهما: أن المعنى: أَمْ مَنْ عدَدْنا خَلْقه من الملائكة والشياطين والسموات والأرض، قاله ابن جرير.,"""His saying, the Most High: {So ask them} that is, ask them a question of confirmation {Are they stronger in creation} that is, more perfect in craftsmanship {or whom We have created} in this there are two sayings: one of them is that the meaning is: or whom We have numbered in creation from the angels, the devils, the heavens, and the earth, as said by Ibn Jarir."""
4,{فَٱسْتَفْتِهِمْ} فاستخبرهم والضمير لمشركي مكة أو لبني آدم.,"""Then ask them"" or ""Then inquire of them,"" and the pronoun refers to the polytheists of Mecca or to the children of Adam."
5,{أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقاً أَم مَّنْ خَلَقْنَا} يعني ما ذكر من الملائكة والسماء والأرض وما بينهما والمشارق والكواكب والشهب الثواقب، و {مِنْ} لتغليب العقلاء ويدل عليه إطلاقه ومجيئه بعد ذلك، وقراءة من قرأ «أم من عددنا»، وقوله: {إِنَّا خَلَقْنَـٰهُم مّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ} فإنه الفارق بينهم وبينها لا بينهم وبين من قبلهم كعاد وثمود، وإن المراد إثبات المعاد ورد استحالته والأمر فيه بالإِضافة إليهم وإلى من قبلهم سواء، وتقريره أن استحالة ذلك إما لعدم قابلية المادة ومادتهم الأصلية هي الطين اللازب الحاصل من ضم الجزء المائي إلى الجزء الأرضي وهما باقيان قابلان للانضمام بعد، وقد علموا أن الإِنسان الأول إنما تولد منه إما لاعترافهم بحدوث العالم أو بقصة آدم وشاهدوا تولد كثير من الحيوانات منه بلا توسط مواقعة، فلزمهم أن يجوزوا إعادتهم كذلك، وإما لعدم قدرة الفاعل ومن قدر على خلق هذه الأشياء قدر على ما لا يعتد به بالإِضافة إليها سيما ومن ذلك بدؤهم أولاً وقدرته ذاتية لا تتغير.,"Are they more difficult to create, or those whom We have created? This means what has been mentioned of the angels, the sky, the earth, what is between them, the easts, the planets, and the shooting stars. And ""from"" is used to emphasize the rational beings, as indicated by its generality and its occurrence after that, and the reading of those who read ""Am man 'adadna"" (Or those whom We have numbered), and His saying: ""Indeed, We created them from sticky clay"" (37:11), for it is the distinguishing factor between them and it, not between them and those before them like 'Ad and Thamud. And that the purpose is to prove the resurrection and refute its impossibility, and the matter in this regard is equal with regard to them and those before them. And its clarification is that the impossibility of that is either due to the inability of the material, and their original material is sticky clay, which is obtained from combining the watery part with the earthy part, and they are both remaining and capable of combining again. And they have known that the first human was born from it, either because of their acknowledgment of the occurrence of the universe or because of the story of Adam, and they have witnessed the birth of many animals from it without the mediation of intercourse. So it is obligatory for them to allow their return in the same way. Or it is due to the inability of the creator, and whoever is able to create these things is able to create what is insignificant in comparison to them, especially since that is their beginning first, and His ability is inherent and does not change."
6,{فَٱسْتَفْتِهِمْ} فاستخبر كفار مكة {أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقاً} أي أقوى خلقاً من قولهم شديد الخلق وفي خلقه شدة، أو أصعب خلقاً وأشقه على معنى الرد لإنكارهم البعث، وأن من هان عليه خلق هذه الخلائق العظيمة ولم يصعب عليه اختراعها كان خلق البشر عليه أهون {أَم مَّنْ خَلَقْنَا} يريد ما ذكر من خلائقه من الملائكة والسماوات والأرض وما بينهما.,"""Then ask them,"" ask the disbelievers of Mecca, ""Are they stronger in creation?"" meaning, are they stronger in creation than what they say is strong in creation and has strength in it, or are they more difficult and harder in creation, in the sense of refuting their denial of the resurrection, and that whoever finds it easy to create these great creatures and does not find it difficult to invent them, creating humans would be easier for Him. ""Or what We have created?"" He means what He mentioned of His creatures, such as the angels, the heavens, the earth, and what is between them."
7,وكيف يسع هذا الخلق إله فرد؟,How can this creation be the work of a single God?
8,"{إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُم مِّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ} أي من طينٍ رخوٍ لزج لا قوة فيه قال الطبري: وإِنما وصفه باللزوب لأنه ترابٌ مخلوطٌ بماء، وكذلك خُلِق ابنُ آدم من ترابٍ وماء، ونار وهواء، والترابُ إِذا خُلط بماءٍ صار طيناً لازباً، والغرضُ من الآية إِقامةُ البرهان على إعادة الإِنسان، فالذي خلقه من العدم وخلق هذه الخلائق، قادرٌ على إعادة الأجسام بعد الفناء {بَلْ عَجِبْتَ وَيَسْخَرُونَ} أي بل عجبتَ يا محمد من تكذيبهم للبعث مع رؤيتهم آثار قدرة الله الباهرة، وهم يسخرون منك ومما تقول لهم في ذلك قال أبو السعود: المعنى عجبتَ من قدرة الله تعالى على هذه الخلائق العظيمة وإِنكارهم للبعث، وهم يسخرون من تعجبك وتقريرك للبعث {وَإِذَا ذُكِّرُواْ لاَ يَذْكُرُونَ} أي وإِذا وُعظوا بالقرآن وخوّفوا به، لا يتعظون ولا يتدبرون {وَإِذَا رَأَوْاْ آيَةً يَسْتَسْخِرُونَ} أي وإِذا رأوا آية باهرة، أو معجزة قاهرة تدل على صدقك كانشقاق القمر، وتكليم الشجر والحجر، يبالغون في السخرية أو يدعون غيرهم للسخرية والاستهزاء {وَقَالُوۤاْ إِن هَـٰذَآ إِلاَّ سِحْرٌ مُّبِينٌ} أي ما هذا الذي جئتنا به يا محمد إلا سحر واضح بيِّن قال في البحر: والإِشارة بـ \"" هذا \"" إلى ما ظهر على يديه عليه السلام من الخارق المعجز {أَءِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَاباً وَعِظَاماً أَءِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ} الاستفهام للإِنكار والاستهزاء أي أئذا أصبحت أجسادنا بالية، وتفتَّت أجزاؤها إلى تراب وعظام سوف نبعث؟","""Indeed, We created them from a sticky clay."" That is, from soft, sticky clay with no strength. Al-Tabari said: It is described as sticky because it is soil mixed with water, and thus, the son of Adam was created from soil and water, fire and air, and when soil is mixed with water, it becomes sticky clay. The purpose of the verse is to establish proof of the resurrection of man, for the One who created him from nothing and created these creatures is capable of resurrecting bodies after their demise. ""But you wonder, and they ridicule."" That is, but you, O Muhammad, wonder at their denial of the resurrection while they see the clear signs of Allah's power, and they ridicule you and what you tell them about it. Abu Al-Saud said: The meaning is that you wonder at Allah's power over these great creatures and their denial of the resurrection, and they ridicule your wonder and your assertion of the resurrection. ""And when they are reminded, they do not take heed."" That is, and when they are admonished with the Quran and warned by it, they do not take heed nor reflect. ""And when they see a sign, they ridicule it."" That is, and when they see a clear sign, or an overwhelming miracle that indicates your truthfulness, such as the splitting of the moon, or the speaking of trees and stones, they exaggerate in ridicule or invite others to ridicule and mock. ""And they said, 'This is nothing but clear magic.'"" That is, what you have brought us, O Muhammad, is nothing but clear, evident magic. It is said in Al-Bahr: The reference with ""this"" is to what appeared on his hands, peace be upon him, of the extraordinary and miraculous. ""Is it that when we die and become dust and bones, shall we indeed be resurrected?"" The question is for denial and ridicule, meaning, when our bodies become decayed, and their parts disintegrate into dust and bones, will we be resurrected?"
9,أشد خلْقا: أصعب خلقا.,Most difficult to create: most difficult to create.
10,اسأل أيها الرسول هؤلاء المنكرين للبعث: أهُمْ اصعبُ خلقا أم السماواتُ والأرض وما في هذا الكون الكبير!,"Ask, O Messenger, these deniers of the Resurrection: Are they harder to create, or the heavens and the earth and what is in this vast universe?"
11,{فَٱسْتَفْتِهِمْ أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقاً} الاستفتاء نوع من السؤال والهمزة في أهم وإن خرجت إلى معنى التقرير فهي في الأصل لمعنى الاستفهام أي فاستخبرهم والضمير لمشركي مكة وقيل نزلت في أبي الأشد بن كلدة وكني بذلك لشدة بطشه وقوته وعادل في هذا الاستفهام التقريري في الأشدية بينهم وبين ما خلق من غيرهم من الأمم من الجن والملائكة والأفلاك والأرضين.,"""Then ask them, are they the most difficult to create?"" The word ""استفتاء"" means a type of question, and the hamza in ""أهم"" means ""are they,"" even though it has shifted to a meaning of affirmation, it originally means interrogation. That is, ask them, and the pronoun refers to the polytheists of Mecca. It is said that it was revealed about Abu Al-Ashad ibn Kulda, and he was nicknamed that due to his severity and strength. In this interrogative affirmation, it equates between them and what was created from others of the nations, from jinn, angels, heavens, and lands."
12,قوله - عز وجل - : {فَٱسْتَفْتِهِمْ أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقاً أَم مَّنْ خَلَقْنَآ}.,"His - the Exalted in Might - said: {So ask them, are they the most difficult to create, or those whom We have created?}"
13,قيل: هي السماوات والأرض والجبال، وقيل: الملائكة، وأكثرهم قالوا: قوله - عز وجل - : {أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقاً أَم مَّنْ خَلَقْنَآ}، أي: السماوات والأرض؛ كقوله - عز وجل - : {لَخَلْقُ ٱلسَّمَٰوَٰتِ وَٱلأَرْضِ أَكْـبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ ٱلنَّاسِ …} الآية [غافر: 57]، يقول - والله أعلم - : سلهم أن خلقهم وإعادتهم أشدّ وأكبر وأعظم من خلق السماوات والأرض؟,"It was said: ""They are the heavens, the earth, and the mountains,"" and it was said: ""The angels."" Most of them said: His - the Almighty's - saying: ""{Are they harder to create or those [others] We created?}"" (Quran 77:23), meaning: the heavens and the earth; as His - the Almighty's - saying: ""{The creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind...}"" (Quran 40:57). He says - and Allah knows best -: Ask them, is their creation and resurrection harder, greater, and more immense than the creation of the heavens and the earth?"
14,وقوله: {فَٱسْتَفْتِهِمْ أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقاً …} الآية.,"And His saying: {So ask them, are they stronger in creation…} the verse."
15,ولا قال لهم: إنهم لو أجابوك وأفتوك بكذا فقل لهم كذا أو أجبهم بكذا؛ فجائز أن يكون الجواب ما ذكرنا: أنكم لو لم تشاهدوا خلق ما ذكر من السماوات والأرض وغيرها سوى خلق أنفسكم ثم شاهدتم خلقنا أعني ما ذكرنا من السماوات والأرض والجبال وغيرها - هل تنكرون قدرته على خلق ما شهدتم وعاينتم: أنه لم يخلقها إلا هو، كيف أنكرتم قدرته على إعادتكم وبعثكم؟!,"And He said to them: If they respond to you and give you such and such an answer, then say to them such and such, or respond to them with such and such; it is possible that the answer is what we mentioned: that if you had not witnessed the creation of what was mentioned of the heavens and the earth and other than yourselves, then you witnessed our creation, meaning what we mentioned of the heavens and the earth and mountains and others - would you deny His ability to create what you witnessed and saw: that He did not create it except Himself, how did you deny His ability to return you and resurrect you?!"
16,أو أن يذكر لقوله - عز وجل - : {إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُم مِّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ} بدء خلقهم وأصله الذي خلقوا هم منه، إنكم إنما عرفتم ابتداء خلقكم وأصلكم الذي منه خلقتم أنه تراب أو طين بإخبار الرسل، ويقول لهم: وأنتم يا أهل مكة ممن لا يؤمنون بالرسل، فكيف صدقتم الرسل بما أخبروا من أصلهم وبدء خلقكم، ولم تصدقوهم بما يخبرونكم من إعادتكم وبعثكم بعد موتكم؟!,"Or that he mentions the saying of the Almighty - Exalted is He -: {Indeed, We created them from a sticky clay} [Al-Sajdah: 7] as the beginning of their creation and the origin from which they were created. You only know the beginning of your creation and the origin from which you were created, that it is dust or clay, through the information of the messengers. And He says to them: And you, O people of Makkah, are among those who do not believe in the messengers, so how do you believe the messengers in what they inform you about your origin and the beginning of your creation, and you do not believe them in what they inform you about your resurrection and being brought back to life after your death?!"
17,أو يقول: إنه أنشأ من تلك النفس الواحدة التي خلقها من تراب من الخلق ما لو تركهم جميعاً لم يفنهم ولم يمتهم، لامتلأت الدنيا منها، فمن قدر على إنشاء ما تمتلئ الدنيا منه من نفس واحدة لا يحتمل أن يعجزه شيء من البعث والإعادة وغير ذلك، والله أعلم.,"He says: ""He created from that single soul, which He created from dust, such a creation that if He left them all, He would not destroy them nor cause them to die, for the world would be filled with them. So, He who is capable of creating from a single soul what would fill the world, it is not possible that anything, such as resurrection and return and other things, would be beyond His power. And Allah knows best."""
18,أو أن يقول في قوله - عز وجل - : {إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُم مِّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ}، أي: قد أنشأ من تلك النفس ومن ذلك الأصل قرناً وقرنا بعد قرن بعد إفناء كل قرن أنشأ قرناً آخر؛ فلا يحتمل أن يكون المقصود من إنشائهم الإنشاء ثم الإفناء والنقض، خاصة لا عاقبة تقصد بالإنشاء والإفناء؛ إذ في الشاهد من كان مقصوده في البناء الفناء والنقض خاصة كان غير حكيم، فإذا عرفتم الله - عز وجل - أنه حكيم؛ فلا يحتمل أن يكون مراده من إنشائكم وإفنائكم ذلك خاصة لا غير وذلك مزيل الحكمة، ويوجب السفه، تعالى الله عن ذلك وجميع ما يصفه الملاحدة علوّاً كبيراً.,"Or, he might say in His saying - may He be exalted -: {Indeed, We created them from a sticky clay}, meaning: He has created from that soul and from that origin generation after generation after the annihilation of each generation, He creates another generation; it is not possible that the purpose of their creation is creation and then annihilation and destruction, especially with no end in view with creation and annihilation; for in reality, whoever's purpose in building is annihilation and destruction alone is not wise. So, if you know that Allah - may He be exalted - is wise, it is not possible that His purpose in creating and annihilating you is only that and nothing else, for that would negate wisdom and would imply foolishness. Exalted is Allah from that and from all that the atheists attribute to Him, in a great exaltation."
19,{وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا ٱلإِنسَانَ مِن صَلْصَالٍ} الآية، لما نبه تعالى على منتهى الخلق وهو الحشر يوم القيامة إلى ما يستقرون فيه نبههم على مبدأ أصلهم آدم صلى الله عليه وسلم وما جرى لعدوه إبليس من المحاورة مع الله تعالى وتقدم شىء من هذه القصة في أوائل البقرة عقب ذكره الأمانة والاحياء والرجوع إليه تعالى، وفي الأعراف بعد ذكر يوم القيامة وذكر الموازين فيه وفي الكهف بعد ذكر الحشر، وكذا في سورة ص بعد ذكر ما أعد من الجنة والنار لخلقه فحيث ذكر منتهى هذا الخلق ذكر مبدأهم وقصته مع إبليس ليحذرهم من كيده ولينظر واما جرى له معه حتى أخرجه من الجنة التي هي مقر السعادة والراحة إلى الأرض التي هي مقر التكليف والتعب فيحترزوا من كيده.,"""And indeed, We created man from clay"" verse, when the Most High reminded of the end of creation, which is the gathering on the Day of Resurrection, to what they will settle in, He reminded them of the origin of their father Adam, peace be upon him, and what happened to his enemy Iblees from the conversation with Allah, the Most High. And something of this story has already been mentioned in the early parts of Al-Baqara after mentioning the trust, life, and return to Him, the Most High, and in Al-A'raf after mentioning the Day of Resurrection and the scales in it, and in Al-Kahf after mentioning the gathering, and similarly in Surat Sad after mentioning what has been prepared of Paradise and the Fire for His creation. So wherever the end of this creation is mentioned, their beginning and their story with Iblees is mentioned to warn them of his deceit and to consider what happened to him with him until he expelled him from the Paradise, which is the abode of happiness and rest, to the earth, which is the abode of duty and hardship, so that they may beware of his deceit."
20,{سَوَّيْتُهُ} أكملت خلقه والتسوية عبارة عن الإِتقان وجعل أجزائه مستوية فيما خلقت له.,"""I perfected his creation, and perfection means making his parts equal to what they were created for."""
