,original_sentence,translation
0,وأما الطريق الثاني فإليه الإشارة بقوله {إنا خلقناهم من طين لازب} أي لازم والباء بدل من الميم عند أكثرهم ولهذا قال ابن عباس: هو الملتصق من الطين الحر.,"As for the second path, it is indicated by His saying, ""Indeed, We created them from sticky clay."" That is, it is adhering, and the baa' is a substitute for the mim according to most of them. And for this reason, Ibn Abbas said: It is the adhering clay."
1,وفي هذا الطريق الثاني تقوية للطريق الأوّل، فإن خلقهم من الطين شهادة عليهم بالضعف والرخاوة.,"In this second path, there is a strengthening of the first path, for their creation from clay is a testimony to their weakness and softness."
2,والتركيب يدور على الفناء والنفاد ومنه نزحت الركية حتى نزفتها إذا لم تترك فيها ماء.,"The structure revolves around destruction and depletion, and from it, the well was drained until it was exhausted, leaving no water in it."
3,{إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُم مِّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ} أي جيد حر يلصق ويعلق، باليد ومعناه اللازم تبدل الميم كأنه يلزم اليد، وقال السدي: خالص.,"""We created them from sticky clay."""
4,ثم ذكر خَْلق الناس فقال: {إِنّا خَلَقْناهم مِنْ طينٍ لازِبٍ} قال الفراء، وابن قتيبة: أي: لاصقٍ لازمٍ، والباء تُبدَلُ من الميم لقُربِ مَخْرَجَْيهما.,"Then he mentioned the creation of people and said: ""Indeed, We created them from a sticky clay."" Al-Farra and Ibn Qutaybah said: ""That is, adhering, necessary, and the baa' is substituted for the mim due to the proximity of their exits."""
5,قال ابن عباس: هو الطيّن الحُرُّ الجيِّد اللَّزِقُ.,"Ibn Abbas said: It is the pure, good, sticky clay."
6,وقال غيره: هو الطِّين الذي يَنْشَف عنه الماءُ وتبقى رطوبتُه في باطنه فيَلْصَق باليد كالشمع.,"He said: It is the clay from which the water evaporates, but its moisture remains inside, so it sticks to the hand like wax."
7,{إِنَّا خَلَقْنَـٰهُم مِّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ} لاصق أو لازم وقرىء به، وهذا شهادة عليهم بالضعف لأن ما يصنع من الطين غير موصوف بالصلابة والقوة، أو احتجاج عليهم بأن الطين اللازب الذي خلقوا منه تراب فمن أين استنكروا أن يخلقوا من تراب مثله حيث قالوا أئذا كنا تراباً؟,"""Indeed, We created them from sticky clay."" It is also read as ""adhesive or necessary,"" and this is a testimony to their weakness because what is made from clay is not described as strong and firm, or an argument against them that the sticky clay from which they were created is dust, so how did they deny being created from similar dust when they said, ""When we are dust?"""
8,لازِب: لازم ثابت، لاصق.,"Adherent: Necessary, fixed, adhesive."
9,لقد خلقنا كل ذلك من لا شيء، وخلقناهم من طين لاصقٍ بعضُه ببعض، فأين هم من خلق هذا الكون العجيب!,"We created all of that from nothing, and We created them from sticky clay, some of it adhering to some. So where are they from the creation of this amazing universe!"
10,{مِّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ} اللازب اللازم ما جاوره واللاصق به.,"""From sticky clay"""
11,وقوله - عز وجل - : {إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُم مِّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ}.,"""His saying - may He be exalted -: {Indeed, We created them from a sticky clay.}"""
12,وقوله عز وجل: {مِّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ} قيل: ملتزق، وقيل ملتصق الذي يلتصق باليد إذا لمس.,"His saying, the Almighty: {From sticky clay} It was said: adhering, it was said: sticking, which sticks to the hand when touched."
13,الصلصال، قال أبو عبيدة: الطين، إذا خلط بالرمل وجف والحماطين أسود منتن واحده حماة بتحريك الميم.,"Clay, Abu Ubayda said: Mud, when mixed with sand and dried, and the two black stinky ones, one is called Hamat with the movement of the mim."
