,original_sentence,translation
0,ثم بين أنهم مع قيام الحجج الضرورية عليهم مصرون على الإنكار فقال {بل عجبت} من قرأ بفتح التاء فظاهر أي عجبت يا محمد من تكذيبهم وإنكارهم البعث {و} هم {يسخرون} من تعجبك، أو عجبت من القرآن حين أعطيته ويسخر أهل الكفر منه.,"Then He explained that despite the necessary proofs against them, they insist on denial, so He said, ""But I am amazed"" - whoever reads with the opening of the ta' marbuta, it is apparent, meaning, ""I am amazed, O Muhammad, at their denial and mockery of the resurrection."" And they mock your amazement, or I am amazed at the Quran when it was given to me, and the people of disbelief mock it."
1,ومن قرأ بالضم فأورد عليه أن التعجب على الله غير جائز لأنه روعة تعتري الشخص عند استعظام الشيء.,"And whoever reads with the damm, it is objected to him that wonderment is not permissible for Allah, because it is a state of awe that overcomes a person when he is struck by something."
2,سلمنا لكن العجب هو أن يرى الإنسان ما ينكره الكافر والإنكار من الله تعالى غير منكر.,"We have submitted, but it is surprising that a person sees what the disbeliever denies, and denial from Allah, the Most High, is not denied."
3,عند من يرى أن العجب من الله.,"""With those who see that wonder is from Allah."""
4,"وقد جاء في الحديث \"" يعجب ربك من الشاب ليس له صبوة \"" وقال أيضاً: \"" عجب ربكم من ألكم وقنوطكم وسرعة إجابته \"" والألّ التضرع.","""And it was said in the hadith, 'Your Lord is pleased with the youth who has no deviation,' and He also said, 'Your Lord is amazed at your supplication and despair, and the swiftness of His response.' And 'al' means supplication."""
5,{بَلْ عَجِبْتَ} قرأ حمزة والكسائي وخلف (عجبتُ) بضم التاء - وهي قراءة ابن مسعود وابن عباس على معنى أنهم قد حلّوا محل من تعجّب منهم، وقال الحسين بن الفضل: العجب من الله، إنكار الشيء وتعظيمه وهو لغة العرب، وقد جاء في الخبر: عجب ربكم من إلّكم وقنوطكم والخبر الآخر: إنّ الله ليعجب من الشاب إذا لم يكن له صبوة ونحوها، وسمعت أبا القاسم الحسن بن محمد النيسابوري يقول: سمعت أبا عبد الله محمد بن علي البغدادي يقول: سُئل جنيد عن هذه الآية فقال: إنّ الله لا يعجب من شيء، ولكنّ الله وافق رسوله لمّا عجب رسوله، فقال: ف {تَعْجَبْ فَعَجَبٌ قَوْلُهُمْ} [الرعد: 5].,"""Indeed, they were amazed."" This was read by Hamzah, Al-Kisa'i, and Khalaf (amazed) with the pronoun ""ta"" in the nominative case - and this is the reading of Ibn Mas'ud and Ibn Abbas, meaning that they have taken the place of those who are amazed at them. Al-Husayn ibn Al-Fadl said: Amazement from Allah means disapproving of something and magnifying it, and this is the language of the Arabs. It has come in the hadith: ""Your Lord is amazed at your despair and your giving up,"" and another hadith: ""Indeed, Allah is amazed at the youth who has no youthful folly and the like."" I heard Abu Al-Qasim Al-Hasan ibn Muhammad Al-Nisaburi say: I heard Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Ali Al-Baghdadi say: ""Junaid was asked about this verse, and he said: 'Indeed, Allah does not marvel at anything, but Allah agreed with His Messenger when His Messenger marveled, so He said: 'So, {marvel not, then, at their speech} [Ar-Ra'd: 5].'"""
6,قال: إنما يعجب من لا يعلم، والله عنده علم كلّ شيء، ومعناه، بل عجبت من تكذيبهم إياك.,"He said: ""Only those who do not know are amazed, and Allah has the knowledge of all things. Its meaning is: 'I am amazed at their denying you.'"""
7,"قوله تعالى: {بل عَجِبْتَ} \"" بل \"" معناه: تركُ الكلام الأول والأخذُ في الكلام الآخر، كأنه قال: دع يا محمد ما مضى.","""His saying, the Exalted: {But you were astonished} 'But' means: leaving the first speech and taking up the second speech, as if He said: Leave, O Muhammad, what has passed."""
8,ومن ضَمَّ، أراد الإِخبار عن الله عز وجل أنه عَجِبَ، قال الفراء: وهي قراءة عليّ، وعبد الله، وابن عباس، وهي أحبُّ إليّ، وقد أنكر هذه القراءة قوم، منهم شريح القاضي، فإنه قال: إن الله لا يَعْجَب إِنما يَعْجَبَ مَنْ لا يَعْلَم.,"And whoever includes, he intended to inform about Allah, the Exalted, that He was amazed. Al-Farra' said: This is the recitation of Ali, Abdullah, and Ibn Abbas, and it is more beloved to me. However, some people have denied this recitation, among them is the judge Shurayh, for he said: Allah does not marvel, only he who does not know marvels."
9,قال الزجاج: وإنكار هذه القراءة غلط، لأن العَجَبَ من الله خلاف العَجَب من الآدميين، وهذا كقوله {ويَمْكُر اللهُ} [الأنفال: 30] وقوله {سَخِر اللهُ منهم} [التوبة: 79] وأصل العَجَب في اللغة: أن الإِنسان إِذا رأى ما يُنْكرِهُ ويَقَلُّ مِثْلُه، قال: قد عَجَبتُ من كذا، وكذلك إِذا فَعَلَ الآدميُّون ما يُنْكِرُه اللهُ عز وجل، جاز أن يقول: عَجِبْتُ، واللهُ قد عَلِم الشيءَ قبل كونه.,"Al-Zajjaj said: ""Denying this reading is a mistake, because wonder from Allah is different from wonder from humans. This is like His saying, 'And Allah plans,' [8:30] and His saying, 'Allah mocks them,' [9:79]. The origin of wonder in language is that when a person sees something he disapproves of and it is rare, he says, 'I am amazed at such and such.' Similarly, if humans do something that Allah disapproves of, it is permissible for Him to say, 'I am amazed,' and Allah has known the thing before its existence."""
10,وقال ابن الأنباري: المعنى: جازيتُُهم على عجبهم من الحق فسمّى الجزاء على الشيء باسم الشيء الذي له الجزاء، فسمّى فعله عَجَباَ وليس بعَجَب في الحقيقة، لأن المتعَجِّب يدهش ويتحيَّر، واللهُ عزَ وجَلَّ قد جَلّ عن ذلك؛ وكذلك سُمِّي تعظيم الثواب عَجَباَ، لأنه إنما يُتعجَّب من الشيء إِذا كان في النهاية، والعرب تسمي الفعل باسم الفعل إِذا داناه من بعض وجوهه، وإن كان مخالفاً له في أكثر معانيه، قال عديّ: ثُمَّ أَضْحَوْا لَعِبَ الدَّهْرُ بهِمُ [وكَذاكَ الدَّهْرُ يُودِي بالرِّجالِ] فجعل إهلاك الدهر وإِفساده لَعِباً.,"Ibn al-Anbari said: The meaning is: I rewarded them for their wonder at the truth, so he named the reward for something after the thing for which the reward is given, and he named his action 'wonder' although it is not truly 'wonder' in reality, because the one who wonders is astonished and perplexed, and Allah, the Exalted in Might, is far above that. Similarly, the greatness of the reward is called 'wonder' because one only wonders at something if it is at its utmost. The Arabs name an action after an action if it is similar to it in some way, even if it is different from it in most of its meanings. Adi said: ""Then they became a plaything for time"" [and thus time destroys men], so he called the destruction and corruption of time 'play.'"
11,وقال غيره: إِضافة العَجَب إَلى الله على ضربين: أحدهما: بمعنى الإِنكار والذمِّ، كهذه الآية.,"And others have said: The attribution of wonder to God is in two ways: one of them is in the sense of denial and blame, like this verse."
12,"بحث روائي في الدر المنثور أخرج ابن المنذر عن ابن جريح في قوله تعالى {بل عجبت} قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم \"" عجبت بالقرآن حين أُنزل ويسخر منه ضلال بني آدم \"" وفي تفسير القمي في قوله تعالى {احشروا الذين ظلموا} قال الذين ظلموا آل محمد عليهم السلام حقهم {وأزواجهم} قال أشباههم.","A narrative research in Al-Durr Al-Manthur: Ibn Al-Mundhir narrated from Ibn Jurayj regarding the verse {Indeed, they were amazed} [Quran 50:2], the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said, ""I was amazed by the Quran when it was revealed, and the misguided among the children of Adam mock it."" And in Al-Qumi's Tafsir regarding the verse {Gather those who did wrong} [Quran 36:24], he said, ""Those who did wrong are the ones who wronged the rights of Ahl Al-Bayt (peace be upon them)."" And {and their mates} he said, ""Their likenesses."""
13,{بَلْ عَجِبْتَ} من قدرة الله تعالى وإنكارهم للبعث.,"""Indeed, you are amazed"" at the power of Allah, the Exalted, and their denial of the Resurrection."
14,والعجب من الله تعالى إما على الفرض والتخييل أو على معنى الاستعظام اللازم له فإنه روعة تعتري الإِنسان عند استعظامه الشيء، وقيل إنه مقدر بالقول أي: قال يا محمد بل عجبت.,"And wonder from Allah, the Most High, is either on the basis of assumption and imagination, or in the sense of the necessary greatness, for it is an awe that seizes a person when he is amazed by something. It has also been said that it is estimated by saying, ""O Muhammad, but you were amazed."""
15,وهذا المعنى يعضده ما يتلوه من ذكر إنكارهم البعث {بَلْ عَجِبْتَ} من تكذيبهم إياك {وَيَسْخُرُونَ} هم منك ومن تعجبك، أو عجبت من إنكارهم البعث وهم يسخرون من أمر البعث، {بَلْ عَجِبْتَ} حمزة وعلي أي استعظمت، والعجب روعة تعتري الإنسان عند استعظام الشيء فجرد لمعنى الاستعظام في حقه تعالى لأنه لا يجوز عليه الروعة، أو معناه قل يا محمد بل عجبتُ {وَإِذَا ذُكِّرُواْ لاَ يَذْكُرُونَ} ودأبهم أنهم إذا وعظوا بشيء لا يتعظون به.,"This meaning is supported by what follows, mentioning their denial of the resurrection: ""But you are astonished"" from their disbelief in you, ""and they ridicule"" you and your astonishment, or you are astonished by their denial of the resurrection and they ridicule the matter of the resurrection. ""But you are astonished,"" according to Hamza and Ali, meaning you have considered it greatly, and astonishment is a state that overcomes a person when they consider something greatly, so it is stripped of its meaning in the case of Allah, the Exalted, because it is not permissible for Him to be overcome. Or its meaning is: Say, O Muhammad, ""But I am astonished,"" and ""when they are reminded, they do not take heed."" And their habit is that when they are admonished with something, they do not take it to heart."
16,{بَلْ عَجِبْتَ وَيَسْخُرُونَ} بل عجبتَ أيها النبيّ من إنكارهم للبعث وهم يسخَرون من تعجّبك ويستهزئون.,"""Rather, you are amazed, and they ridicule."""
17,{بَلْ عَجِبْتَ} خطاب للرسول عليه الصلاة والسلام وقرىء: عجبت وعجبت والظاهر أن ضمير المتكلم هو لله تعالى والعجب لا يجوز على الله تعالى.,"""Indeed, you were amazed"" - an address to the Messenger (peace be upon him). It is also read: ""I was amazed"" and ""I was amazed."" It appears that the pronoun of the speaker is that of Allah, the Exalted, and amazement is not permissible for Allah, the Exalted."
18,وقوله - عز وجل - : {بَلْ عَجِبْتَ وَيَسْخَرُونَ}.,"""His saying - may He be exalted -: {But you are amazed, while they ridicule.}"""
19,وفي بعض الحروف: {بل عجبتُ} بالرفع، وكذلك ذكر عن ابن مسعود - رضي الله عنه - أنه كان يقرؤه بالرفع: {بل عجبتُ} فإن ثبت ذلك وصح إضافة العجب إلى الله فهو في الشاهد وإن كان لظهور عظيم مما قالوا خفيّاً عليهم مستتراً، عند ذلك يقع لهم العجبُ فهو في الله عز وجل، وإن كان لا يحتمل أن يخفى عليه شيء، فذلك لعظيم ما كان منهم من الإنكار من قدرته على الإنشاء والجحود في ذلك؛ فيكون ما ذكر من حرف العجب منه كناية عن الإنكار والدفع لقولهم، وذلك كما أضاف الامتحان إلى نفسه وإن كان في الشاهد لا يستعمل إلا في استظهار ما خفي عليهم واستتر منهم، فهو من الله يخرج على الأمر والنهي - أعني الامتحان - وإن كان في الشاهد بين الخلق لا يكون إلا لما ذكرنا، فعلى ذلك جائز إضافة العجب إلى الله على إرادة الإنكار منه عليهم والدفع لقولهم، والله أعلم.,"And in some letters: {But I was amazed} with the raising, and similarly, it was mentioned that Ibn Mas'ud - may Allah be pleased with him - used to recite it with the raising: {But I was amazed}. If this is proven and it is correct to attribute amazement to Allah, then it is in the witness, even if it is for the greatness of what they said, which was hidden from them and concealed, then amazement would occur for them. But it is not possible for anything to be hidden from Allah, so that is due to the greatness of their denial of His ability to create and their disbelief in that; so what was mentioned of the letter of amazement from Him is a metaphor for denial and refutation of their saying. And this is like attributing the test to Himself, even though in the witness it is only used to reveal what is hidden from them and concealed from them, but from Allah it comes out on the command and prohibition - meaning the test - even though in the witness among the people it is only for what we mentioned. So, it is permissible to attribute amazement to Allah with the intention of denying it from them and refuting their saying, and Allah knows best."
20,ومن الناس من أنكر هذه القراءة وقال: لا يجوز إضافة التعجب إلى الله - عز وجل - لما هو لم يزل عالماً بما كان ويكون، وهو في الشاهد إنما يكون لظهور عظيم من الأمر قد جهلوه، لكن هذا وإن كان في الخلق ما ذكر فهو من الله على غير ذلك، على ما ذكرنا من إضافة الامتحان إليه والابتلاء وإن كان بين الخلق لما ذكرنا، وقد ظهرت إضافته إليه بقوله: {وَإِن تَعْجَبْ فَعَجَبٌ قَوْلُهُمْ} [الرعد: 5] وهو يخرج على الإنكار عليهم والرد على تعظيم إنكار ما قالوا وأنكروا، والله أعلم.,"And among the people are those who denied this reading and said: ""It is not permissible to attribute astonishment to Allah - the Exalted in Might - for He has never ceased to know what was and what will be. In reality, it is only for the appearance of a great matter that they have not known. However, this, even if it is mentioned among the creation, is different from Allah, as we mentioned in attributing the test and trial to Him, even if it is mentioned among the creation, and its attribution to Him has appeared in His saying: {And if you are astonished, then wonderful is their statement} [Ar-Ra'd: 5]. And it is an expression of denying them and refuting their exaggeration in denying what they said and denied. And Allah knows best."
21,ومن الناس من قال في قوله عز وجل: {بَلْ عَجِبْتَ} فيما أضافه إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: أي عجبت من هذا القرآن حين أعطاك إياه ويسخر منه أولئك الكفرة.,"""And among the people, some said about the saying of the Almighty: {But you are amazed} in what He attributed to the Messenger of Allah, may the blessings and peace of Allah be upon him: 'You are amazed at this Quran when He gave it to you,' and those disbelievers mock it."""
22,ويحتمل معنى [آخر]، وهو أن يقال: إن قوله عز وجل: {بَلْ عَجِبْتَ} أي: جعلت ما أنزلت عليك من القرآن والوحي أمراً عجباً، أو أن يقال: كان إنكارهم رسالتك وتكذيبهم الآيات أمراً عجباً وهم يسخرون، ونحوه، والله أعلم.,"It is possible to understand [another] meaning, which is to say: His, the Exalted's, saying: {Indeed, you are amazed} means: you made what I revealed to you of the Quran and revelation an amazing matter, or it can be said: their denial of your message and their disbelief in the signs was an amazing matter, and they mocked, and the like. And Allah knows best."
23,وقال الزجاج: حرف العجب إنما يكون عند ظهور العجب من الأمر وعبرة عظيمة، فأما ما أضيف إلى الله فهو على الإنكار منه والرد على من أنكر عظيماً من الأمر ظاهراً، أو كلام نحوه، والله أعلم.,"Al-Zajjaj said: The letter of wonder (عجب) is only when there is a manifestation of wonder from the matter and a great lesson. As for what is attributed to Allah, it is in denial of it and refutation of whoever denies a great matter that is apparent, or similar speech. And Allah knows best."
