,original_sentence,translation
0,قال جار الله {إلا عباد الله} استثناء منقطع أي لكن عباد الله {المخلصين أولئك لهم رزق} قلت: يجوز أن يكون الاستثناء متصلاً والمعنى: وما تجزون إلا ما كنتم تعملون من غير زيادة إلا المخلصين فإن جزاءهم بالأضعاف.,"He said, ""Except for the servants of Allah,"" which is an exception that is not connected, meaning 'but the servants of Allah, the sincere ones, for them is a provision.' I said: It is possible that the exception is connected, and the meaning is: 'And you will not be recompensed except for what you used to do, without any increase, except for the sincere ones, for their recompense is multiplied.'"
1,ثم قال: {إِلاَّ عِبَادَ ٱللَّهِ ٱلْمُخْلَصِينَ} أي: إلا عباد الله الذين أخلصهم يوم خلقهم لرحمته، فإنهم لا يذوقون العذاب الأليم.,"Then He said: ""Except the servants of Allah, the purified ones"" (meaning: except the servants of Allah whom He has purified for His mercy on the day He created them), for they will not taste the painful torment."
2,ومن قرأ بكسر اللام فمعناه: إلا عباد الله الذين أخلصوا له العمل والتوحيد.,"And whoever reads with the breaking of the lam, its meaning is: except the servants of Allah who have purified for Him their deeds and monotheism."
3,قوله تعالى {إلا عباد الله المخلصين} إلى قوله {بيض مكنون} استثناء منقطع من ضمير {لذائقوا} أو من ضمير {ما تجزون} ولكل وجه والمعنى على الأول لكن عباد الله المخلصين أُولئك لهم رزق معلوم وليسوا بذائقي العذاب الأليم والمعنى على الثاني لكن عباد الله المخلصين أُولئك لهم رزق معلوم وراء جزاء عملهم وسيجيء الإِشارة إلى معناه.,"His Exalted saying: ""Except the devoted servants of Allah"" to His saying: ""Preserved eggs"" is an exception that is disconnected from the pronoun ""they will taste"" or from the pronoun ""what you will be recompensed with."" Each interpretation is valid. The meaning on the first interpretation is: But the devoted servants of Allah, those have a known provision and they will not taste the painful punishment. The meaning on the second interpretation is: But the devoted servants of Allah, those have a known provision beyond the recompense for their deeds. Its meaning will come later."
4,وقد سماهم الله سبحانه عباد الله المخلصين فأثبت لهم عبودية نفسه والعبد هو الذي لا يملك لنفسه شيئاً من إرادة ولا عمل فهؤلاء لا يريدون إلا ما أراده الله ولا يعملون إلا له.,"And Allah, the Exalted, has named them the sincere servants of Allah, so He has established for them servitude to Himself. And the servant is the one who does not possess for himself any will or action. So, they do not will except what Allah wills, and they do not act except for Him."
5,ثم أثبت لهم أنهم مخلصون بفتح اللام أي إن الله تعالى أخلصهم لنفسه فلا يشاركه فيهم أحد فلا تعلق لهم بشيء غيره تعالى من زينة الحياة الدنيا ولا من نعم العقبى وليس في قلوبهم إلا الله سبحانه.,"Then He proved to them that they are sincere, by opening the lam, meaning that God Almighty has purified them for Himself, so no one shares them with Him. They have no attachment to anything other than Him, the Exalted, from the adornments of this worldly life or from the blessings of the Hereafter. There is nothing in their hearts except God, the Glorified."
6,ومن هنا يظهر أن أخذ قوله {إلا عباد الله المخلصين} استثناء من ضمير {وما تجزون} لا يخلو من وجه كما تقدمت الإِشارة إليه.,"And from here it appears that taking his saying {except the devoted servants of Allah} as an exception from the pronoun {and not you will be recompensed} is not devoid of a basis, as was previously indicated."
7,ثم استثنى المؤمنين فقال {إِلاَّ عِبَادَ ٱللَّهِ ٱلْمُخْلَصِينَ}.,"Then He excepted the believers, saying, ""Except the devoted servants of Allah."""
8,قرأ أهل المدينة، والكوفة {المخلصين} بفتح اللام، أي الذين أخلصهم الله لطاعته، وتوحيده.,"The people of Medina and Kufa read [al-mukhlisīn] with the opening of the lam, meaning those whom Allah has purified for His obedience and oneness."
9,وقرأ الباقون بكسرها، أي الذين أخلصوا لله العبادة، والتوحيد، والاستثناء إما متصل على تقدير تعميم الخطاب في {تجزون} لجميع المكلفين.,"And the rest read it with a kasra, meaning those who have sincerely worshipped Allah, believed in His oneness, and the exception is either connected on the estimation of generalizing the address in ""you will be recompensed"" for all those who are accountable."
10,أو منقطع، أي لكن عباد الله المخلصين لا يذوقون العذاب، والإشارة بقوله {أُوْلَـٰئِكَ} إلى المخلصين، وهو مبتدأ، وخبره قوله {لَهُمْ رِزْقٌ مَّعْلُومٌ} أي لهؤلاء المخلصين رزق يرزقهم الله إياه معلوم في حسنه، وطيبه، وعدم انقطاعه.,"Or cut off, but the devoted servants of Allah will not taste the punishment. The reference in His saying {Those} is to the devoted ones, and it is the beginning, and its news is His saying {For them is a known provision}, that is, for these devoted ones is a provision that Allah provides for them, known in its goodness, purity, and uninterruptedness."
11,والمخلَصون: الذين أخلصوا دينهم لله عن كل شائبة تناقض الإِخلاص، وما أخللنا به من الكلمات هاهنا، فقد سبق تفسيرها في [الأعراف: 16] وغيرها.,"""The sincere ones: those who have purified their religion for Allah from every blemish that contradicts sincerity, and what we have mentioned here of words, its explanation has preceded in [Al-A'raf: 16] and others."""
