,original_sentence,translation
0,4ـ الاستعارة التصريحية {إِذْ أَبَقَ إِلَى ٱلْفُلْكِ ٱلْمَشْحُونِ} شبه خروجه بغير إذن ربه بإِباق العبد من سيّده.,4- Explicit Metaphor {When he fled to the laden ship} He likened his departure without his Lord's permission to the escape of a slave from his master.
1,6ـ الاستعارة التمثيلية {فَإِذَا نَزَلَ بِسَاحَتِهِمْ} مثل للعذاب النازل بهم بجيش هجم عليهم فأناخ بفنائهم بغتة، ونصحهم بعض النصاح فلم يلتفتوا إلى إنذاره ولا أخذوا أهبتهم، حتى اجتاحهم الجيش.,"6. The allegorical metaphor {فَإِذَا نَزَلَ بِسَاحَتِهِمْ} is like the punishment descending upon them with an army that suddenly attacked them, encamped in their courtyard, and some advisors advised them, but they did not pay attention to his warning nor did they prepare, until the army overwhelmed them."
2,والاستسلام الإِسلام القوي، أي إسلام النفس وترك المدافعة فهو مبالغة في أسلم.,"""Submission to Islam is strong, that is, submission of the soul and leaving off resistance, for it is an exaggeration of submission."""
3,مثاله المصلون يقفون أوّلاً صفوفاً ثم يزجرون الوساوس عنهم بالاستعاذة ثم يشتغلون بالقراءة.,"An example is that worshippers first stand in rows, then they drive away distractions by seeking refuge, then they engage in recitation."
4,وقيل: يصيبهم مرة ويسلمون مرة فصاروا في ذلك كراكبي السفينة للتجارة.,"It is said: ""They are hit once and escape once, so they are like the sailors of the ship for trade."""
5,وهم حينئذ من شدة الهول هائمون حائرون {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} [الصافات: 26] منقادون خاضعون، ومن خوف اشتداد العذاب عليهم خائفون خاشعون {وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ} حين يساقون نحو النار {يَتَسَآءَلُونَ} [الصافات: 27] أي: يتخاصمون ويتلاومون.,"And at that time, from the severity of the horror, they will be wandering, confused. ""Rather, they are today submissive"" [As-Saffat: 26], obedient, submissive, and from the fear of the intensification of the punishment upon them, they will be fearful, humble. ""And they will turn to one another"" [As-Saffat: 27] when they are driven towards the Fire, ""questioning each other,"" that is, they will argue and blame one another."
6,{بل هم اليوم مستسلمون} مُنقادون.,"""Indeed, they are today submissive, obedient."""
7,{بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} أي: مستسلمون لأمر الله وقضائه، فهم موقنون بعذابه.,"""Rather, they are today submissive"" meaning: submissive to Allah's command and decree, so they are certain of His punishment."
8,{بل هم اليوم مستسلمون}: أي قد أسلم بعضهم بعضاً، وخذله عن عجز، وكل واحد منهم مستسلم غير منتصر.,"""Rather, they are today submissive"": that is, they have handed over some of them to others, and have abandoned them out of helplessness, and each one of them is submissive and not victorious."
9,ولهذا قال: {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ}.,"""Therefore, He said: {Indeed, they are today submissive.}"""
10,ثم أضرب سبحانه عما تقدّم إلى بيان الحالة التي هم عليها هنالك، فقال {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} أي منقادون لعجزهم عن الحيلة.,"Then He, the Exalted, moved on from what preceded to describe the state they are in there, and said, ""Rather, they are today submissive,"" meaning they are yielding due to their inability to devise a plan."
11,وقال الأخفش ملقون بأيديهم، يقال استسلم للشيء إذا انقاد له وخضع.,"He said, ""They are thrown down with their hands,"" meaning, ""He surrendered to the thing when he submitted to it and humbled himself."""
12,قوله (تعالى): {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} قال ابن عباس: خاضعون.,"His (Exalted is He) saying: {Rather, they are today submissive} Ibn Abbas said: Humble."
13,وقال الحسن منقادون، يقال اسْتَسْلَمَ للشيء إذا انقاد له وخضع.,"He said, ""They are submissive,"" it is said, ""He surrendered to the thing"" when he submitted to it and humbled himself."
14,قوله تعالى: {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} قال قتادة: مستسلمون في عذاب الله عز وجل.,"""Rather, they are today submissive."" Qatada said: ""Submissive in the punishment of Allah, the Mighty and Majestic."""
15,ثم بيَّن سبحانه أنهم لا يقدرون على التناصر فقال {بل هم اليوم مستسلمون} أي منقادون خاضعون ومعنى الاستسلام أن يلقي بيده غير منازع فيما يراد منه {وأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتساءلون} هذا إخبار منه سبحانه أن كل واحد منهم يقبل على صاحبه الذي أغواه فيقول له على وجه التأنيب والتعنيف لِمَ غررتني ويقول ذلك له: لِمَ قبلت منّي.,"Then He, the Exalted, clarified that they would not be able to help each other, and said, ""Rather, they are today submissive."" That is, they are obedient and submissive. The meaning of submission is to surrender without resistance to whatever is wanted from him. ""And they will turn to one another, questioning."" This is a report from Him, the Exalted, that each one of them will turn to his companion who misled him and say to him reproachfully, ""Why did you deceive me?"" and he will say to him, ""Why did you accept from me?"""
16,26 - لا يتناصرون فى هذا اليوم، بل هم منقادون مستسلمون لأمر الله.,"26 - They will not help each other on that Day, but they will be submissive and resigned to the command of Allah."
17,هذا تهكم بهم وتوبيخ لهم بالعجر عن التناصر بعد ما كانوا على خلاف ذلك في الدنيا متعاضدين متناصرين {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} قد أسلم بعضهم بعضاً وخذله عن عجز، فكلهم مستسلم غير منتصر.,"This is a mockery of them and a rebuke for their inability to support each other, after they were, in this world, mutually supportive and aiding each other. {Rather, they are today submissive}, having abandoned each other and failed due to helplessness, so all of them are submissive and not victorious."
18,ثم يقال لهم في بعض أحوال استيلاء الفزَع عليهم: قوله جلّ ذكره: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ}.,"Then it is said to them in some of their states of being overcome by fear: His, the Exalted in Might, saying: ""What is the matter with you that you do not help one another? Nay, they are this Day submissive [to their Lord]. And they turn to one another, questioning."""
19,قُرىء لا تَتَناصرون، ولا تنَّاصرُون بالإدغامِ {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} مُنقادون خاضعُون لظهورِ عجزهم وانسدادِ بابِ الحِيلِ عليهم أو أسلم بعضُهم بعضاً وخذله عن عجزٍ فكلُّهم غيرُ منتصرٍ.,"""Read, 'You will not be helped,' and 'You will not be helped,' with assimilation {but they are today submissive} obedient and submissive due to the appearance of their helplessness and the closure of the door of tricks against them, or they have surrendered to each other and abandoned each other due to helplessness, so none of them is victorious."""
20,ثم قال تعالى انهم لا يقدرون على التناصر والتدافع لكن {هم اليوم مستسلمون} ومعنا مسترسلون مستحدثون يقال: استسلم استسلاماً إذا القي بيده غير منازع في ما يراد منه.,"Then He, the Exalted, said, ""They are not able to help each other or defend themselves, but today they are submissive. And they are relaxed and at ease with us."" It is said: ""He submitted submission"" when he gives up without contesting what is wanted from him."
21,ثم أضرب - سبحانه - عما تقدم إلى بيان حالهم يوم القيامة فقال {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ}.,"Then He, the Exalted, moved on from what preceded to describe their state on the Day of Resurrection, saying, ""Rather, they are today submissive."""
22,والاستسلام أصله طلب السلامة، والمراد به هنا الانقياد التام، والخضوع المطلق، يقال استسلم العدو لعدوه، إذا انقاد له وخضع لأمره.,"And submission, its origin is seeking safety, and what is meant by it here is complete obedience, and absolute submission. It is said, ""The enemy surrendered to his enemy,"" when he submitted to him and obeyed his command."
23,أى ليسوا فى هذا اليوم بقادرين على التناصر، بل هم اليوم خاضعون ومستسلمون، لعجزهم عن أى حيلة تنقذهم مما هم فيه من بلاء.,"They are not, on this day, able to help one another, but they are today submissive and resigned, due to their inability to find any means to save them from the affliction they are in."
24,ثم قال تعالى: {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} يقال استسلم للشيء إذا انقاد له وخضع، ومعناه في الأصل طلب السلامة بترك المنازعة، والمقصود أنهم صاروا منقادين لا حيلة لهم في دفع تلك المضار لا العابد ولا المعبود.,"Then He, the Most High, said: {But they are today submissive.} It is said that one submits to something when one yields to it and submits, and its original meaning is to seek safety by refraining from contention. The intended meaning is that they have become submissive, with no means to repel those harms, neither the worshipper nor the worshipped."
25,ولكنهم لا يستطيعون عمل شيء وينقادون مستسلمين لأمر الله.,But they cannot do anything and submit to the decree of Allah.
26,{بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} أي قد أسلم بعضهم بعضاً وخذله عن عجز فكل واحد مستسلم غير منتصر.,"""Rather, they are today submissive, having handed over one another and abandoned one another due to helplessness. So each one is submissive, not victorious."""
27,{بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} أي منقادون لأمر الله لا يخالفونه ولا يحيدون عنه، والله أعلم.,"""Rather, they are today submissive,"" that is, they are obedient to Allah's command, neither disobeying nor deviating from it, and Allah knows best."
28,فيخبر عن إياسهم من نصر ما عبدوا على رجاء النصر لهم والشفاعة؛ كقوله: {بَلْ هُمُ ٱلْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُون} [الصافات: 26]، أي: خاضعون ذليلون لله، لما علموا ألا يكون النصر والعون إلا منه، فعند ذلك يستسلمون له.,"He informs about their despair of victory for what they worshipped in hope of victory and intercession for them; as His saying: {But they are today submissive} [As-Saffat: 26], that is, humbled and submissive to Allah, when they realized that victory and help come only from Him, then they submit to Him."
29,وقال بعضهم: يستسلمون في عذابه.,And some of them said: They will submit in His punishment.
30,{(26) بَلْ هُمُ الْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ} منقادون لعجزهم او متسالمون يسلم بعضهم بعضاً ويخذله.,"They are today submissive, yielding to their helplessness or reconciled, each surrendering to the other and abandoning them."
