,original_sentence,translation
0,"وقيل: لمسوسون مقهورون من دانه إذا ساسه ومنه الحديث \"" الكيس من دان نفسه \"" وعن بعضهم: أراد بالمتحادثين الرجلين المذكورين في الكهف في قوله {واضرب لهم مثلاً رجلين} [الآية: 32] {قال} يعني ذلك القائل أو الله أو بعض الملائكة {هل أنتم مطلعون} إلى النار اي هل تحبون أن تطلعوا فتعلموا أين منزلتكم منها.","It is said: ""They are afflicted and subdued."" From the saying, ""He who subdues himself is wise."" And from some of them: ""He meant the two men mentioned in the cave in His saying, 'And strike for them a parable, two men' [verse: 32]. He said, meaning that speaker or Allah or some of the angels, 'Are you looking in?' That is, do you want to look and see where your place is in it."
1,قالوا: على وجهة الاستبعاد والمعرفة لهم مفقودة، والبصائر لهم مسدودة، وقلوبهم عن التوحيد مصدودة، {قُلْ نَعَمْ وَأَنتُمْ دَاخِرُونَ} [الصافات: 18] على وجه الفقر تبعثون، وبزجرةٍ واحدةٍ تحشرون، كما قال: {فَإِنَّمَا هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ فَإِذَا هُمْ} [الصافات: 19] قيام {يَنظُرُونَ} [الصافات: 19]، حيارى كأنهم سكارى، {وَقَالُواْ يٰوَيْلَنَا هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلدِّينِ} [الصافات: 20] دعوا بالويل على أنفسهم حين لا ينفعهم الويل؛ فيقال لهم: {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلْفَصْلِ} [الصافات: 21] الذي كذبتم به، وقد عاينتم {ٱلَّذِي كُنتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ * ٱحْشُرُواْ ٱلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ} [الصافات: 21 - 22]، يشير به إلى حشر النفوس ولعبادها {وَمَا كَانُواْ يَعْبُدُونَ * مِن دُونِ ٱللَّهِ} [الصافات: 22 - 23] من الهوى والدنيا والشيطان {فَٱهْدُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ ٱلْجَحِيمِ} [الصافات: 23]، فإنهم كانوا في الدنيا يهدون إلى هذا الصراط، وأنهم يحشرون على ما ماتوا عليه، وكذلك من أعان صاحب فترة في فترته أو صاحب زلة في زلته كان مشاركاً في عقوبته، واستحقاق طرده وإبعاده، كما أشركت النفوس والأجساد في الثواب والعقاب؛ لقوله: {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ} [الصافات: 24]، فيه إشارة إلى أن للسالك في كل مقام وقفة تناسب ذلك المقام، وهو مسئول عن أداء حقوق ذلك المقام، فإن خرج عن عهدة جوابه بالصواب أذن في العبور وإلاَّ بقي موقوفاً رهيناً بأحواله إلى أن يؤدي حقوقه، فمن السؤال صعب وقوم يسألهم الملك، فالذين يسألهم الملائكة أقوام لهم أعمال صالحة تصلح للعرض والكشف، وأقوام لهم أعمال لا تصلح للكشف، وهم قسمان: الخواص يسترهم الحق عن إطلاع الخلق عليهم في الدنيا والآخرة.,"They said: ""On the face of exclusion and knowledge is lost to them, and their insights are blocked, and their hearts are turned away from monotheism. 'Say, 'Yes, and you will be humbled.'"" [Al-Saffat: 18] On the face of poverty, you will be resurrected, and with a single shout, you will be gathered, as He said: ""Then it is only a single shout, and behold, they will be standing, looking on."" [Al-Saffat: 19] In confusion, as if they were drunk. ""And they will say, 'Woe to us! This is the Day of Recompense.'"" [Al-Saffat: 20] They will call out for woe upon themselves when woe will not benefit them; so it will be said to them: ""This is the Day of Judgment"" [Al-Saffat: 21] which you used to deny, and you have seen ""the one which you used to deny."" [Al-Saffat: 21] ""Gather those who did wrong, and their companions"" [Al-Saffat: 22], referring to the gathering of souls and their worshippers ""and what they used to worship besides Allah"" [Al-Saffat: 22-23] of desires, the world, and Satan. ""Then lead them to the path of Hellfire."" [Al-Saffat: 23] For in this world, they used to lead to this path, and they will be gathered on what they died upon. Similarly, whoever aids someone in a period of ignorance or someone in a slip will be a partner in his punishment, and deserving of his expulsion and banishment, as the souls and bodies are partners in reward and punishment; for His saying: ""And stop them; indeed, they are to be questioned."" [Al-Saffat: 24] In it is an indication that for the traveler in every station there is a halt appropriate to that station, and he is responsible for fulfilling the rights of that station. If he fulfills his answer correctly, he is permitted to pass on; otherwise, he remains detained, held accountable for his conditions until he fulfills his rights. Some questioning is difficult, and some people the angels will question. Those whom the angels question are people with good deeds that are suitable for presentation and revelation, and people with deeds not suitable for revelation, and they are of two types: the elect, whom Allah conceals from the knowledge of creation in this world and the Hereafter."
2,هذا استئناف إخبار جره ما قبله، فأخبر تعالى أن بعثهم من قبورهم إنما هو {زجرة واحدة}، وهي نفخة البعث في الصور، وقوله {ينظرون}، يحتمل أن يريد بالأبصار أي ينظرون ما هم فيه وصدق ما كانوا يكذبون به، ويحتمل أن يكون بمعنى ينتظرون، أي ما يفعل بهم ويؤمرون به، ثم أخبر عنهم أنهم في تلك الحال يقولون {يا ويلنا} ينادون الويل بمعنى هذا وقت حضورك وأوان حلولك، وروى أبو حاتم الوقف ها هنا وجعل قوله {هذا يوم الدين} من قول الله تعالى لهم أو الملائكة، ورأى غيره أن قوله تعالى: {هذا يوم الدين} هو من قول الكفرة الذين قالوا {يا ويلنا}، و {الدين} الجزاء والمقارضة كما يقولون كما تدين تدان، وأجمعوا أن قوله {هذا يوم الفصل} إلى آخر الآية ليس من قول الكفرة وإنما المعنى يقال لهم، وقوله تعالى: {وأزواجهم} معناه وأنواعهم وضرباؤهم، قاله عمر بن الخطاب رضي الله عنه وابن عباس وقتادة ومنه قوله تعالى: {وكنتم أزواجاً ثلاثة} [الواقعة: 7]، وقوله تعالى: {وإذا النفوس زوجت} [التكوير: 7] أي نوعت، وروي أنه يضم عند هذا الأمر كل شكل وصاحبه من الكفرة إلى شكله وصاحبه ومعهم {ما كانوا يعبدون من دون الله} من آدمي رضي بذلك ومن صنم ووثن توبيخاً لهم وإظهاراً لسوء حالهم، وقال الحسن: المعنى وأزواجهم المشركات من النساء وروي ذلك عن ابن عباس ورجحه الرماني، وقوله تعالى {فاهدوهم}.,"This is a continuation of the news preceded by what came before it. Allah, the Exalted, informed that their resurrection from their graves will be with ""a single shout,"" which is the blast of resurrection in the trumpet. His saying, ""they will look,"" may mean with their eyes, i.e., they will see what they are in and the truth of what they used to deny, or it may mean they will wait, i.e., what will be done to them and what they will be commanded to do. Then He informed about them that in that state they will say, ""O woe to us!"" They call out to woe as if to say, ""This is the time of your presence and the moment of your arrival."" Abu Hatim reported the pause here and made His saying, ""This is the Day of Judgment,"" as the saying of Allah to them or the angels. Others saw that His saying, ""This is the Day of Judgment,"" is from the saying of the disbelievers who said, ""O woe to us!"" And ""judgment"" means recompense and requital, as they say, ""As you judge, you will be judged."" They agreed that His saying, ""This is the Day of Judgment,"" to the end of the verse, is not from the saying of the disbelievers but rather it is said to them. His saying, ""and their mates,"" means their kinds and their counterparts, as said by Umar ibn al-Khattab, Ibn Abbas, and Qatadah. From this is His saying, ""And you will be three kinds"" [Al-Waqiah: 7], and His saying, ""And when souls are paired"" [At-Takwir: 7], i.e., categorized. It is reported that in this matter, every similar person and his companion from the disbelievers will be joined with his similar person and companion, along with ""what they used to worship besides Allah,"" whether it be a human who consented to that or an idol or a statue, to reproach them and reveal their miserable state. Al-Hasan said, ""The meaning is their disbelieving wives,"" and this was reported from Ibn Abbas and preferred by Al-Rummani. His saying, ""So guide them,"""
3,فتقول لهم الملائكة على سبيل التوبيخ والتقريع {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلْفَصْلِ ٱلَّذِي كُنتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ} أي هذا يوم الفصل بين الخلائق الذي كنتم تنكرونه وتكذبون به قال البيضاوي: الفصلُ: القضاءُ والتفريق بين المحسن والمسيء {ٱحْشُرُواْ ٱلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ} أي اجمعوا الظالمين وأشباههم من العصاة والمجرمين، كل إنسان مع نظرائه قال القرطبي: الزاني مع الزاني، وشارب الخمر مع شارب الخمر، والسارق مع السارق وقال ابن عباس: اجمعوا الظالمين ونساءهم الكافرات، وعنه المراد به أشباههم من العصاة {وَمَا كَانُواْ يَعْبُدُونَ * مِن دُونِ ٱللَّهِ} أي وما كانوا يعبدون من الأوثان والأصنام، وذلك زيادةً في تحسيرهم وتخجيلهم {فَٱهْدُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ ٱلْجَحِيمِ} أي فعرفوهم طريق الجحيم ووجهوهم إليها، وفي لفظ {اهدوهم} تهكم وسخرية، فإِذا لم يهتدوا في الدنيا إلى الصراط المستقيم، فليهتدوا اليوم إلى صراط الجحيم {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ} أي احبسوهم عند الصراط لأنهم سيسألون عن جميع أقوالهم وأفعالهم، ثم يقال لهم على سبيل التقريع والتوبيخ {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} أي ما لكم لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً وأنتم هنا جميعاً؟,"The angels will say to them by way of reproach and rebuke, ""This is the Day of Judgment which you used to deny."" That is, this is the Day of Judgment between the creatures which you used to deny and disbelieve. Al-Baydawi said: ""Judgment"" means the verdict and the distinction between the good and the evil. ""Gather those who did wrong and their companions."" That is, gather the wrongdoers and their like from the disobedient and criminals, each person with his peers. Al-Qurtubi said: the adulterer with the adulterer, the drinker with the drinker, and the thief with the thief. Ibn Abbas said: gather the wrongdoers and their disbelieving women, and from him, it is said that it means their like from the disobedient. ""And what they used to worship besides Allah."" That is, and what they used to worship of idols and statues, and that is an increase in their sorrow and shame. ""Then guide them to the path of Hell."" That is, then show them the path to Hell and direct them to it, and in the word ""guide them"" there is mockery and sarcasm. If they did not guide themselves to the straight path in this world, then let them guide themselves to the path of Hell today. ""And stop them, indeed they are to be questioned."" That is, hold them at the path because they will be asked about all their words and deeds. Then it will be said to them by way of reproach and rebuke, ""What is the matter with you that you do not help each other while you are all here?"""
4,{هذا يوم الفصل} اى القضاء او الفرق بين فريقى الهدى والضلال {الذى كنتم به تكذبون} اى كنتم على الاستمرار تكذبون به وتقولون انه كذب ليس له اصل ابدا فيقول الله تعالى للملائكة {احشروا الذين ظلموا} الحشر يجيئ بمعنى البعث وبمعنى الجمع والسوق وهو المراد ههنا دون الاول كما لا يخفى والمراد بالظالمين المشركون من بنى ادم جمع كنيدوبهم آريد آنانرا كه ستم كردند برخود بشرك {وازواجهم} اى اشباههم من اهل الشرك والكفر والنفاق والعصيان عابد الصنم مع عبدته وعابد الكواكب مع عبدتها واليهود مع اليهود والنصارى مع النصارى والمجوس مع المجوس وغيرهم من الملل المختلفة ويجوز ان يكون المراد بالازواج نساءهم اللاتى على دينهم او قرناءهم من الشياطين كل كافر مع شيطانه فى سلسلة {وما كانوا يعبدون من دون الله} من الاصنام ونحوها زيادة فى تحسيرهم وتخجيلهم {فاهدوهم الى صراط الجحيم} الضمير للظالمين وازواجهم ومعبوديهم اى فعرّفوهم طريق جهنم ووجهوهم اليها وفيه تهكم بهم ويقال الظالم فى الآية عام على من ظلم نفسه وغيره فيحشر كل ظالم مع من كان معينا له اهل الخمر مع اهل الخمر واهل الزنى مع اهل الزنى واهل الربا مع اهل الربا وغيرهم كل مع مصاحبه درقوت القلوب آورده كه يكى از عبد الله بن مبارك قدس سره برسيدكه من خياطم واحيانا براى ظلمه جامه مى دوزم ناكاه ازعوان ايشان نباشيم ابن مبارك فرمودنى توكه ازاعوان نيستى بلكه از ظالمانى اعوان ظلمه آنهااند كه سوزن ورشته بتو ميفروشند.,"This is the Day of Judgment, the day of distinction between the parties of guidance and misguidance, which you used to deny, saying that it is false and has no basis at all. Then Allah, the Most High, says to the angels, ""Gather those who did wrong,"" meaning the polytheists among the children of Adam. ""And their mates,"" meaning their counterparts from among the people of polytheism, disbelief, hypocrisy, and disobedience. The idolater with his idolaters, the star-worshipper with his star-worshippers, the Jews with the Jews, the Christians with the Christians, the Magians with the Magians, and others from the different religions. It is also possible that the meaning of ""mates"" is their wives who are of their religion, or their companions from the devils, each unbeliever with his devil in a chain. ""And what they used to worship instead of Allah,"" such as idols and the like, to increase their sorrow and shame. ""Then lead them to the path of Hell,"" the pronoun refers to the wrongdoers, their mates, and their deities, meaning, make them know the path to Hell and direct them to it. There is a mockery of them in this. It is said that the wrongdoer in the verse is general, encompassing whoever wronged himself and others. Each wrongdoer will be gathered with those who were his companions. The drinkers with the drinkers, the adulterers with the adulterers, the usurers with the usurers, and others, each with his companion. In the book ""Daraqutul Qulub,"" it is mentioned that someone asked Abdullah ibn al-Mubarak, may Allah have mercy on him, ""I am a tailor, and sometimes I sew clothes for the oppressors. Am I not one of their helpers?"" Ibn al-Mubarak said to him, ""You are not one of their helpers, but rather one of the oppressors. The helpers of the oppressors are those who sell you the needle and thread."""
5,لأنه يقال هدى إذا تقدم ومنه الهداية والهوادي والهاديات الوحش، قال ولا يقال هدى بمعنى قدم، ثم قال {وَقِفُوهُمْ} يقال: وقفت الدابة اقفها وقفاً فوقفت هي وقوفاً، والمعنى احبسوهم وفي الآية قولان أحدهما: على التقديم والتأخير، والمعنى قفوهم واهدوهم، والأصوب أنه لا حاجة إليه، بل كأنه قيل: فاهدوهم إلى صراط الجحيم فإذا انتهوا إلى الصراط قيل {وَقِفُوهُمْ} فإن السؤال يقع هناك وقوله: {أَنَّهُمْ مسؤولون} قيل عن أعمالهم في الدنيا وأقوالهم، وقيل المراد سألتهم الخزنة {أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مّنكُمْ … قَالُواْ بَلَىٰ وَلَـٰكِنْ حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ ٱلْعَذَابِ عَلَى ٱلْكَـٰفِرِينَ} [الزمر: 71] ويجوز أن يكون هذا السؤال ما ذكر بعد ذلك وهو قوله تعالى: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَـٰصَرُونَ} أي أنهم يسألون توبيخاً لهم، فيقال: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَـٰصَرُونَ} قال ابن عباس رضي الله عنهما: لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً كما كنتم في الدنيا، وذلك أن أبا جهل قال يوم بدر: نحن جميع منتصر فقيل لهم يوم القيامة ما لكم غير متناصرين، وقيل يقال لكفار ما لشركائكم لا يمنعونكم من العذاب.,"For it is said, ""He guided"" if he preceded, and from it is guidance, the leaders, and the guiding beasts. It is not said, ""He guided"" meaning he presented. Then he said, ""And stop them."" It is said, ""I stopped the beast, I stop it, stopping, and it stops, standing."" The meaning is, ""Detain them."" There are two sayings about the verse: one is about presenting and delaying, and the meaning is, ""Follow them and guide them."" The more correct opinion is that there is no need for it, but it is as if it were said, ""So guide them to the path of Hell. When they reach the path, it is said, 'And stop them.'"" For the questioning occurs there. And His saying, ""That they will be questioned,"" it is said about their deeds and sayings in this world. It is also said that the keepers will ask them, ""Did not Messengers come to you from among yourselves... They will say, 'Yes, but the word of punishment was justified upon the disbelievers.'"" [Az-Zumar: 71] It is possible that this questioning is what is mentioned after that, which is His saying, ""What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?"" meaning that they are asked to rebuke them, and it is said to them, ""What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?"" Ibn Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, ""Some of you do not help each other as you were in this world."" That is because Abu Jahl said on the day of Badr, ""We are all victorious."" So it is said to them on the Day of Resurrection, ""What is the matter with you that you are not helping each other?"" It is also said, ""It is said to the disbelievers, 'What is the matter with your partners that they do not prevent you from the punishment?'"""
6,"{وقالوا يا ويلنا هذا يوم الدين} يعني يوم الحساب والجزاء {هذا يوم الفصل} أي القضاء وقيل بين المحسن والمسيء {الذي كنتم به تكذبون} أي في الدنيا {احشروا} أي اجمعوا {الذين ظلموا} أي أشركوا وقيل هو عام في كل ظالم {وأزواجهم} أي أشباههم وأمثالهم فكل طائفة مع مثلها فأهل الخمر مع أهل الخمر وأهل الزنا مع أهل الزنا وقيل أزواجهم أي قرناءهم من الشياطين يقرن كل كافر مع شيطانه في سلسلة وقيل أزواجهم المشركات {وما كانوا يعبدون من دون الله} أي في الدنيا يعني الأصنام والطواغيت وقيل إبليس وجنوده {فاهدوهم إلى صراط الجحيم} قال ابن عباس أي دلوهم إلى طريق النار {وقفوهم} أي احبسوهم {إنهم مسؤولون} لما سيقوا إلى النار حبسوا عند الصراط للسؤال قال ابن عباس عن جميع أقوالهم وأفعالهم ويروى عنه عن لا إله إلا الله وروى عن أبي برزة أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال \"" لا تزول قدما عبد يوم القيامة حتى يسأل عن أربع عن عمره فيما أفناه وعن علمه ماذا عمل به وعن ماله من أين اكتسبه وفيما أنفقه وعن جسمه فيما أبلاه \"" وفي رواية.","And they will say, ""Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment."" That is, the Day of Reckoning and Retribution. ""This is the Day of Separation,"" meaning the Day of Judgment, and it is said to be between the good and the evil-doer. ""Which you used to deny,"" that is, in this world. ""Gather,"" that is, assemble ""those who did wrong,"" that is, those who associated partners with Allah, and it is said that it is general for every wrongdoer. ""And their mates,"" that is, their likenesses and their peers, so every group will be with its like, the people of wine with the people of wine, and the people of adultery with the people of adultery. It is also said that their mates are their companions from the devils, every disbeliever will be chained with his devil, and it is said that their mates are the polytheists. ""And what they used to worship instead of Allah,"" that is, in this world, meaning the idols and the tyrants, and it is said Iblis and his soldiers. ""So lead them to the path of Hell,"" Ibn Abbas said, meaning guide them to the path of the Fire. ""And stop them,"" that is, detain them. ""Indeed, they will be questioned,"" when they are driven to the Fire, they will be detained at the bridge for questioning. Ibn Abbas said, about all their sayings and deeds, and it is narrated from him about La ilaha illa Allah. And it is narrated from Abu Barza that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, ""A servant's feet will not move on the Day of Resurrection until he is asked about four things: about his life, how he spent it, about his knowledge, what he did with it, about his wealth, from where he earned it and how he spent it, and about his body, how he wore it out."""
7,"يخبر تعالى عن قيل الكفار يوم القيامة، أنهم يرجعون على أنفسهم بالملامة، ويعترفون بأنهم كانوا ظالمين لأنفسم، فإذا عاينوا أهوال القيامة، ندموا كل الندامة حيث لا ينفعهم الندم، {وَقَالُواْ يٰوَيْلَنَا هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلدِّينِ}، فتقول لهم الملائكة والمؤمنون: {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلْفَصْلِ ٱلَّذِي كُنتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ} على وجه التقريع والتوبيخ، ويأمر الله تعالى الملائكة أن تميز الكفار من المؤمنين، في الموقف في محشرهم ومنشرهم، ولهذا قال تعالى: {ٱحْشُرُواْ ٱلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ}، قال النعمان بن بشير: يعني بأزواجهم أشباههم وأمثالهم؛ وعن عمر بن الخطاب: {وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ} قال: إخوانهم، وقال النعمان: سمعت عمر يقول: {ٱحْشُرُواْ ٱلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ} قال: أشباههم، قال: يجيء أصحاب الزنا مع أصحاب الزنا، وأصحاب الربا مع أصحاب الربا، وأصحاب الخمر مع أصحاب الخمر، وقال ابن عباس: {وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ} قرناءهم، {وَمَا كَانُواْ يَعْبُدُونَ * مِن دُونِ ٱللَّهِ} أي من الأصنام والأنداد تحشر معهم في أماكنهم، وقوله تعالى: {فَٱهْدُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ ٱلْجَحِيمِ} أي أرشدوهم إلى طريق جهنم، وهذا كقوله تعالى: {مَّأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ كُلَّمَا خَبَتْ زِدْنَاهُمْ سَعِيراً} [الإسراء: 97]، وقوله تعالى: {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ} أي قفوهم حتى يسألوا عن أعمالهم وأقوالهم، التي صدرت عنهم في الدار الدنيا، قال ابن عباس: يعني احبسوهم إنهم محاسبون، وقد قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: \"" أيما داع دعا إلى شيء كان موقوفاً معه إلى يوم القيامة لا يغادره ولا يفارقه، وإن دعا رجل رجلاً \""، ثم قرأ: {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ}، وقال ابن المبارك: \"" إن أول ما يسأل عنه الرجل جلساؤه \"" ثم يقال لهم على سبيل التقريع والتوبيخ {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ}؟","God Most High informs about the words of the disbelievers on the Day of Resurrection, that they blame themselves and admit that they were unjust to themselves. When they witness the horrors of the Resurrection, they regret deeply, but regret is of no use to them. They say, ""Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment."" The angels and the believers say to them, ""This is the Day of Judgment which you used to deny,"" as a reproach and rebuke. God Most High commands the angels to distinguish the disbelievers from the believers in their gathering and resurrection. Therefore, He said, ""Gather those who did wrong and their companions."" An-Nu'man bin Bashir said: ""Their companions"" means their likes and peers. Umar bin Al-Khattab said: ""Their companions"" means their brothers. An-Nu'man said: I heard Umar say, ""Gather those who did wrong and their companions"" means their likes. He said: The adulterers will come with the adulterers, the usurers with the usurers, and the drinkers of alcohol with the drinkers of alcohol. Ibn Abbas said: ""Their companions"" means their partners. ""And what they used to worship besides Allah"" means the idols and rivals that will be gathered with them in their places. God Most High said, ""Then guide them to the path of Hell,"" meaning direct them to the way of Hell. This is like His saying, ""Their refuge is Hell; whenever it abates, We increase their burning"" [Al-Isra: 97]. God Most High said, ""And stop them; indeed, they are to be questioned,"" meaning stop them until they are questioned about their deeds and words that they committed in the worldly life. Ibn Abbas said: It means detain them; they will be held accountable. The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, ""Whoever calls to something will be detained with it on the Day of Resurrection, not leaving it nor separating from it. If a man calls another man..."" Then he recited, ""And stop them; indeed, they are to be questioned."" Ibn Al-Mubarak said, ""The first thing a man will be asked about is his companions."" Then they will be said to them as a reproach and rebuke, ""What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?"""
