,original_sentence,translation
0,والهداية والهَدي الدلالة على الطريق لمن لا يعرفه، فهي إرشاد إلى مرغوب وقد غلبت في ذلك، لأن كون المهديّ راغباً في معرفة الطريق من لوازم فعل الهداية ولذلك تقابل بالضلالة وهي الحيرة في الطريق، فذكر {اهدوهم} هنا تهكّم بالمشركين، كقول عمرو بن كلثوم قريناكم فعجلنا قراكم قُبيل الصبح مِرادة طَحونا والصراط الطريق، أي طريق جهنم.,"The guidance and guidance is the indication of the path for those who do not know it, so it is guidance to a desired thing, and it has become predominant in that, because the guided one's desire to know the path is one of the necessities of the act of guidance. Therefore, it is opposed to misguidance, which is confusion in the path. So mentioning {guide them} here is a mockery of the polytheists, as the saying of Amr ibn Kulthum, ""We hosted you and hastened your hospitality before dawn, a grinding mill."" And the path is the path, that is, the path to Hell."
1,وإنما اختصوا بالصراط والعبور عليه ليؤدّوا الأمانة التي حملوها إلى أهلها وهو الله سبحانه وتعالى.,"And they were singled out for the path and crossing it to deliver the trust they carried to its people, which is Allah, the Exalted in Might, the Sublime."
2,قال الزجاج: يقال: هَدَيْتُ الرَّجُل: إِذا دَلَلْتَه، وهَدَيْتُ العروس إِلى زوجها، وأهديتُ الهديَّة، فإذا جعلتَ العروس كالهدية، قلتَ أهديتُها.,"Al-Zajjaj said: It is said: ""I guided the man"" if you showed him the way, and ""I guided the bride to her husband,"" and ""I gave the gift."" So, if you make the bride like the gift, you say ""I gave her as a gift."""
3,وعن الأصمعي: يقال: هديته في الدين هُدى، وهديته الطريق هداية.,"And from Al-Asma'i: It is said: I guided him in religion with guidance, and I guided him to the path with guidance."
4,وقال الواحدي: وهذا وهم لأنه يقال هَدَى إذا تقدم ومنه الهَادِيَةُ والهَوَادِي، وهَادِيَاتُ الوحش، ولا يقال هَدَى بمعنى قدم.,"He said Al-Wahidi: This is a mistake, because it is said ""he guided"" when he went ahead, and from this comes ""the guide"" and ""the guides,"" and ""the guides of the beasts,"" and it is not said ""he guided"" in the sense of ""he presented."""
5,يقال: هديته إلى الطريق، وهديته الطريق أي دللته عليه.,"It is said: I guided him to the path, and I guided him the path, meaning I showed him the way."
6,وقوله {فاهدوهم إلى صراط الجحيم} إنما عبر عن ذلك بالهداية من حيث كان بدلا من الهداية إلى الجنة، كما قال {فبشرهم بعذاب أليم} لهذه العلة من حيث ان البشارة بالعذاب الأليم وقعت لهم بدلا من البشارة بالنعيم، يقال: هديته الطريق أي دللته عليها وأهديت الهدية.,"And His saying, ""Then lead them to the path of Hell,"" He only expressed this as guidance because it is a replacement for guidance to Paradise, as He said, ""Then give them glad tidings of a painful punishment,"" for this reason, because the glad tidings of a painful punishment occurred for them as a replacement for the glad tidings of bliss. It is said: I guided him to the path, meaning I showed him the way, and I gave the gift."
7,والتعبير بالهداية والصراط فيه ما فيه من التهكم بهم، والتأنيب لهم فكأنه - سبحانه - يقول بما أنهم لم يهتدوا فى الدنيا إلى الخير وإلى الحق، وإلى الصراط المستقيم، فليهتدوا فى الآخرة إلى صراط الجحيم.,"And the expression of guidance and the path in it contains what it contains of mockery of them, and reproach for them, as if - He is exalted - says: since they did not find guidance in this world to goodness, to truth, and to the straight path, then let them find guidance in the Hereafter to the path of Hell."
