,original_sentence,translation
0,التفسير: إنه سبحانه بدأ في أوّل هذه السورة بالتوحيد كما ختم السورة المتقدمة بذكر المعاد وأقسم على المطلوب بثلاثة أشياء، أما الحكمة في القسم فكما مرّ في أول سورة يس، وأما الإقسام بغير الله وصفاته فلا نسلم أنه لا يجوز لله سبحانه، أو هو على عادة العرب، أو المراد تعظيم هذه الأشياء وتشريفها، أو المراد رب هذه الأشياء فحذف المضاف.,"The Explanation: He, the Exalted, began this chapter with monotheism, just as He concluded the previous chapter with the mention of the Hereafter. He swore by three things for the desired purpose. As for the wisdom behind the oath, it is as mentioned at the beginning of Surah Ya-Sin. As for swearing by other than Allah and His attributes, we do not concede that it is not permissible for Allah, the Exalted, or it is in the custom of the Arabs, or the intention is to honor and exalt these things, or the intention is the Lord of these things, and the added word is omitted."
1,وقال آخرون: أراد زجرهم الناس عن المعاصي بالخواطر والإلهامات، أو بدفع تعرض الشياطين عن بني آدم.,"And others said: He wanted to deter people from sins through thoughts and inspirations, or by warding off the exposure of the devils to the children of Adam."
2,يحكى عن علي بن أبي طالب رضي الله عنه أنه كان يخرج من الصف وسيفه ينطف دماً فإذا رقى ربوة يأتي بالخطبة الغراء.,"It is narrated that Ali ibn Abi Talib, may God be pleased with him, would leave the row and his sword would be dripping with blood. Then, when he ascended a hill, he would deliver the eloquent sermon."
3,وحين بين الوحدانية ودلائلها في أول هذه السورة أراد أن يذكر ما يدل على الحشر والكلام فيه من طريقين: الأوّل أن يقال: قدر على الأصعب فيقدر على الأسهل بالأولى، الثاني قدر في أول الأمر فيقدر في الحالة الثانية.,"And when He explained the oneness and its proofs at the beginning of this surah, He wanted to mention what indicates the resurrection and discuss it in two ways: the first is to say: He is capable of the more difficult, so He is even more capable of the easier; the second is that He was capable at the beginning, so He is capable in the second state."
4,سلمنا لكن هذه الألفاظ في حقه تعالى محمولة على النهايات كالمكر والاستهزاء والمعنى: بلغ من عظم آياتي وكثرة خلائقي أني استعظمتها فكيف بعبادي وهؤلاء بجهلهم وعنادهم يسخرون منها، أو استعظمت إنكارهم البعث ممن هذه أفعاله وهم يسخرون ممن يصف الله تعالى بالقدرة عليه نظيره الآية {وإن تعجب فعجب قولهم} [الرعد: 5].,"We attribute these expressions to Him, the Exalted, in the sense of ultimate consequences, such as deception and mockery. The meaning is: ""I have reached such a degree of greatness in my signs and multitude of my creations that I have deemed them great, so how much more so should my servants? And these, in their ignorance and obstinacy, mock them, or I have deemed their denial of the Resurrection great, while they mock those who attribute to God, the Exalted, the ability to do it. Its parallel is the verse: 'And if you are amazed, then amazing is their saying' [13:5]."""
5,قرأ أهل الكوفة {يَسَّمَّعُونَ} بالتشديد، أي يتسمعون، قال مجاهد: كانوا يتسمعون ولكن لا يسمعون، وهو اختيار أبي عبيد، وقرأ الآخرون بالتخفيف، وهو اختيار أبي حاتم، {إِلَىٰ ٱلْمَلإِ ٱلأَعْلَىٰ} يعني الكتبة من الملائكة في السماء {وَيُقْذَفُونَ}، ويرمون {مِن كُلِّ جَانِبٍ} من آفاق السماء.,"The people of Kufa read {يَسَّمَّعُونَ} with emphasis, meaning they listen intently. Mujahid said: They would listen intently but not hear. This is the choice of Abu Ubayd. Others read it lightly, which is the choice of Abu Hatim. {إِلَىٰ ٱلْمَلإِ ٱلأَعْلَىٰ} means the scribes of the angels in the sky. {وَيُقْذَفُونَ} and they are thrown {مِن كُلِّ جَانِبٍ} from all directions of the sky."
6,{إِلاَّ مَنْ خَطِفَ ٱلْخَطْفَةَ}: مسارق فسمع الكلمة، {فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ ثَاقِبٌ}: تبعه ولحقه كوكب مضيء قوي لا يخطئه يقتل أو يحرق أو يحيل، وإنما يعودون إلى استراق السمع مع علمهم بأنهم لا يصلون إليه؛ طمعاً في السلامة ونيل المراد كراكب البحر.,"""Except for one who snatches a [brief] hearing, and a piercing star pursues him."""
7,الثالث: عن ولاية علي بن أبي طالب رضي الله عنه، حكاه أبو هارون العبدي عن أبي سعيد الخدري.,"Third: About the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with him, narrated by Abu Harun Al-Abdiy from Abu Saeed Al-Khudri."
8,أقول ورواه الشيخ في الأمالي بإسناده إلى أنس بن مالك عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، وفي العيون عن علي وعن الرضا عليه السلام عنه صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، وفي تفسير القمي عن الإِمام عليه السلام.,"I say, and the Sheikh narrated it in Al-Amali with his chain of narration to Anas bin Malik from the Prophet, peace be upon him and his family, and in Al-Uyun from Ali and from Al-Ridha, peace be upon him, from him, peace be upon him and his family, and in Tafsir Al-Qumi from the Imam, peace be upon him."
9,و «من» في {إِلاَّ مَنْ} في محل الرفع بدل من الواو في {لا يسمعون} أي لا يسمع الشياطين إلا الشيطان الذي {خَطِفَ ٱلْخَطْفَةَ} أي سلب السلبة يعني أخذ شيئاً من كلامهم بسرعة {فَأَتْبَعَهُ} لحقه {شِهَابٌ} أي نجم رجم {ثَاقِبٌ} مضيء.,"And ""from"" in {except from} is in the nominative case as a substitute for the waw in {they do not hear}, meaning the demons do not hear except the demon who {snatches the snatch}, i.e., takes something from their speech quickly. Then {a meteor} follows him, i.e., a star that is thrown {piercing}, i.e., bright."
10,فكان أمرهما ما قصَّ الله علينا في كتابه العزيز.,So their story was as Allah has recounted to us in His noble Book.
11,والبصريون لم يعدوها، فهي عندهم تسع آيات.,"And the people of Basra did not count it, so for them it is nine signs."
12,والذى نراه أن الآية الكريمة تسع كل هذه الأقوال، لأن الرؤساء أوهموا الضعفاء بأنهم على الحق، وأقسموا لهم على ذلك، وهددوهم بالقتل أو الطرد إن هم اتبعوا ما جاءهم به الرسول صلى الله عليه وسلم.,"And what we see is that the noble verse encompasses all these sayings, because the leaders deceived the weak into thinking they were on the right path, and they swore to them that they were, and threatened them with death or expulsion if they followed what the Messenger, may God bless him and grant him peace, brought to them."
13,{بِسمِ ٱلله الرَّحْمٰنِ الرَّحِيـمِ * وَٱلصَّافَّاتِ صَفَّا} الآية هذه السورة مكية ومناسبة أولها لآخر يس أنه تعالى لما ذكر المعاد وقدرته على إحياء الموتى وأنه هو منشئهم وإذا تعلقت إرادته بشىء كان ذكر تعالى وحدانيته إذ لا يتم ما تعلقت به الإِرادة وجوداً وعدماً إلا بكون المريد واحداً وأقسم تعالى بأشياء من مخلوقاته والصافات.,"In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. By those who stand in rows. This surah is Makkan, and its beginning is appropriate to the end of Ya-Sin. When Allah, the Exalted, mentioned the Resurrection and His ability to revive the dead, and that He is their Creator, and when His will is attached to something, it happens, He mentioned His Oneness, for nothing that His will is attached to, in existence or non-existence, is realized except by the willer being One. Allah swore by some of His creations, including those who stand in rows."
14,ثم في ذكر ما ذكر من عنادهم وسفههم، وجعله آيات من القرآن تتلى أبداً وجهان من الحكمة: أحدهما: صيَّر ذلك آية لرسالته صلى الله عليه وسلم لأنه معلوم أنهم كانوا على ما أخبر عنهم من العناد والسفه وعلى أن ختموا وقبضوا، دل أنه بالله عرف ذلك وبوحيه علم، والله أعلم.,"Then, in mentioning what was mentioned of their obstinacy and foolishness, and making it verses of the Qur'an that are recited forever, there are two aspects of wisdom: one of them is that it made it a sign of his mission, peace be upon him, because it is known that they were as he informed about them in terms of obstinacy and foolishness, and that they were sealed and taken, indicating that it was by Allah that this was known and by His revelation that it was learned. And Allah knows best."
15,{111].},"I cannot translate the text ""{111].}"" as it does not appear to be valid Arabic text. Please provide the correct Arabic text for translation."
16,فدل أنه بالله عرف ذلك، على ما ذكرنا: أن ما أنبأ وأخبر عن أنباء الأمم الخالية وأخبارهم يدل على رسالته؛ لما علموا أنه لم يختلف إلى أحد ممن له المعرفة بتلك الأنباء والأخبار ولا ينظر في كتبهم ليعرف ذلك، ثم أخبر على ما كان في كتبهم، دل أنه بالله عرف ذلك وبوحي منه إليه علم، فعلى ذلك لو كان سحراً فكيف إذا كانت آية عظيمة معجزة؟!,"It indicates that it is by God that he knew that, as we mentioned: that what he reported and informed about the news of the past nations and their stories indicates his mission; because they knew that he did not learn from anyone who had knowledge of those news and stories, nor did he look into their books to know that, then he informed about what was in their books, indicating that it is by God that he knew that and by revelation from Him to him he learned, so if it were magic, how could it be a great miraculous sign?!"
17,والقمّي قال عن ولاية امير المؤمنين عليه السلام.,"And Al-Qummi said about the guardianship of the Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon him."
18,ومثله في الأمالي والعيون عن النبيّ صلّى الله عليه وآله.,"And similarly in the Amali and Uyun from the Prophet, peace be upon him and his family."
19,و {لَهَا سَبْعَةُ أَبْوَابٍ} قيل أعلاها للموحدين والثاني لليهود.,And {it has seven gates}. It is said that the highest is for the monotheists and the second for the Jews.
20,أحدهما أنه ذكر والثاني وصفه بالعلم على سبيل المبالغة واستنكر إبراهيم صلى الله عليه وسلم ان يولد له مع الكبر وفيم تبشرون تأكيد استبعاد وتعجب وكأنه لم يعلم أنهم ملائكة، رسل الله تعالى إليه فلذلك استفهم واستنكر أن يولد له ولو علم أنهم رسل الله ما تعجب ولا استنكر ولا سيما وقد رأى من آيات الله عياناً كيف أحيا الموتى.,"One of them is that he is a male, and the second is that he is described as knowledgeable in an exaggerated manner. Ibrahim, peace be upon him, found it strange that he would have a child in his old age. ""And what do you announce?"" is an affirmation of astonishment and disbelief, as if he did not know that they were angels, messengers of Allah, the Exalted, to him. Therefore, he inquired and found it strange that he would have a child. If he had known that they were messengers of Allah, he would not have been astonished or found it strange, especially since he had seen the signs of Allah with his own eyes, how He brought the dead back to life."
21,"{وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَاكَ سَبْعاً} الآية، والمثاني جمع مثناة والمثناة كل شىء أي يجعل اثنين من قولك ثنيت الشىء ثنيا أي عطفته وضممت إليه آخر وهذا مجمل ولا سبيل إلى تعيينه إلا بديل فنفصل جوز الزجاج أن تكون أم القرآن سميت السبع المثاني لأنها يثنى بها على الله قال ابن عطية: وفي هذا القول من جهة التصريف نظر \"" انتهى \"".","""And We have certainly given you seven of the often repeated [verses]."" The verse, and ""al-Mathani"" is the plural of ""mathnat,"" and ""mathnat"" is every two things, from your saying, ""I doubled the thing,"" meaning, I bent it and joined another to it. This is general, and there is no way to specify it except with a sign. So, we detail. Al-Zajjaj suggested that the Mother of the Quran was called ""al-Sab' al-Mathani"" because it is repeated with it to glorify Allah. Ibn Attiyah said: ""There is a grammatical issue with this statement."" End."
22,وقال عمر وعلي وابن مسعود وابن عباس وغيرهم: السبع هنا آيات الحمد قال ابن عباس: وهي سبع ببسم الله الرحمن الرحيم.,"Omar, Ali, Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn Abbas, and others said: ""The seven here are the verses of praise."" Ibn Abbas said: ""They are seven with 'In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.'"""
23,وقال غيره: سبع دون البسملة.,And others said: Seven without the Basmala.
24,وقال أبو العالية: لقد أنزلت هذه السورة وما نزل من السبع الطوال شىء.,"Abu Al-Aliyah said: ""This Surah was revealed, and nothing of the seven long Surahs was revealed."""
