,original_sentence,translation
0,و {الذين ظلموا} المشركون {إن الشرك لظلم عظيم} لقمان 13.,"""And those who have wronged"" are the polytheists. ""Indeed, polytheism is a great wrong."" (Luqman 13)"
1,22، 23 - اجمعوا - يا ملائكتى - الظالمين أنفسهم بالكفر وأزواجهم الكافرات وآلهتهم التى كانوا يعبدونها من دون الله من الأوثان والأنداد، فعرفوهم طريق النار ليسلكوها.,"22, 23 - ""Gather, O My angels, those who wronged themselves and their spouses who were wrongdoers, and their gods which they used to worship instead of Allah, from idols and partners. Then lead them to the path of the Fire."""
2,قوله جلّ ذكره: {ٱحْشُرُواْ ٱلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ وَمَا كَانُواْ يَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ ٱللَّهِ فَٱهْدُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ ٱلْجَحِيمِ وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ}.,"""His Exalted Word: 'Gather those who did wrong, and their partners, and what they used to worship instead of Allah, and guide them to the path of Hellfire. And stop them, for they are to be questioned.'"""
3,{احشروا الذين ظلموا} خطاب من الله سبحانه للملائكة وقيل من الملائكة بعضهم لبعض والحشر الجمع والمراد اجمعوا الذين ظلموا وقد تفرقوا وقيل اجمعوهم من مقاماتهم الى الموقف وقيل منها إلى النار والذين ظلموا هم المشركون وقيل عام في كل ظالم والصحيح الأول لقوله بعد وما كانوا يعبدون من دون الله وبه قال الكلبي {وأزواجهم}.,"""Gather those who wronged"" is an address from Allah, the Exalted, to the angels, and it is said that it is from some of the angels to others. ""Gathering"" means to collect, and the intended meaning is to collect those who wronged, even though they have dispersed. It is said to collect them from their positions to the place of gathering, and it is said from there to the Fire. Those who wronged are the polytheists, and it is said to be general for every wrongdoer. The correct interpretation is the first, as it is followed by ""And what they used to worship besides Allah,"" and this is what Al-Kalbi said. ""And their mates."""
4,والمراد بالذين ظلموا المشركون الذين أشركوا مع الله - تعالى - آلهة أخرى فى العبادة ومن الآيات التى وردت وأطلق فيها الظلم على الشرك والكفر، قوله - تعالى - {إِنَّ ٱلشِّرْكَ لَظُلْمٌ عَظِيمٌ} وقوله - سبحانه - {وَٱلْكَافِرُونَ هُمُ ٱلظَّالِمُونَ} وقد ثبت فى الحديث الصحيح أن النبى صلى الله عليه وسلم فسر الظلم بالشرك فى قوله - تعالى - {ٱلَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَلَمْ يَلْبِسُوۤاْ إِيمَانَهُمْ بِظُلْمٍ أُوْلَـٰئِكَ لَهُمُ ٱلأَمْنُ وَهُمْ مُّهْتَدُونَ} والمراد بأزواجهم أشباههم، ونظراؤهم وأمثالهم فى الشرك والكفر، وهذا التفسير مأثور عن عدد من الصحابة والتابعين، منهم عمر بن الخطاب، والنعمان بن بشير، وابن عباس، وسعيد بن جبير، وعكرمة ومجاهد، وأبو العالية.,"The term ""those who have wronged"" refers to the polytheists who associate other deities with Allah - the Most High - in worship. Among the verses in which wrongdoing is attributed to polytheism and disbelief is His saying - the Most High - {Indeed, polytheism is a great wrongdoing} and His saying - the Most Exalted - {And the disbelievers are the wrongdoers}. It has been established in the authentic hadith that the Prophet, may the peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, interpreted wrongdoing as polytheism in His saying - the Most High - {Those who have believed and have not mixed their faith with wrongdoing - those are the ones for whom there is security, and they are the [rightly] guided}. The term ""their spouses"" refers to their counterparts, peers, and those like them in polytheism and disbelief. This interpretation is attributed to a number of the Companions and Followers, including Umar ibn al-Khattab, al-Nu'man ibn Bashir, Ibn Abbas, Sa'id ibn Jubayr, Ikrimah, Mujahid, and Abu al-Aliyah."
5,ويقول الله للملائكة: اجمعوا الذين ظلموا انفسهم بالكفر، وأزواجَهم وجميع من على شاكلتهم وما كانوا يعبدون من الاصنام وغيرها من دون الله - فقودوهم الى طريق جهنم، مقرهم الأخير.,"And Allah says to the angels: ""Gather those who wronged themselves through disbelief, and their spouses, and all who were like them, and what they used to worship instead of Allah - lead them to the path of Hell, their final abode."""
6,وقد قدمنا إطلاق الظلم على الشرك في آيات متعددة كقوله تعالى: {إِنَّ ٱلشِّرْكَ لَظُلْمٌ عَظِيمٌ} [لقمان: 13].,"We have presented the launching of injustice on polytheism in multiple verses, such as His saying, the Exalted: {Indeed, polytheism is a great injustice} [Luqman: 13]."
7,وقد ثبت في صحيح البخاري عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم أنه فسر الظلم بالشرك في قوله تعالى: {وَلَمْ يَلْبِسُوۤاْ إِيمَانَهُمْ بِظُلْمٍ} [الأنعام: 82].,"It has been established in Sahih al-Bukhari from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, that he interpreted oppression as polytheism in the saying of Allah, the Exalted: {And they did not mix their faith with injustice} [Al-An'am: 82]."
8,القمّي قال الّذين ظلموا آل محمد صلوات الله عليهم حقّهم {وَأَزْواجَهُمْ} وأشباههم {وَمَا كانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ} {(23) دُونِ اللهِ} من الاصنام وغيرها زيادة في تحسيرهم وتخجيلهم {فَاهْدُوهُمْ إِلَى صِرَاطِ الْجَحِيمِ}.,"Al-Qummi said, ""Those who wronged the family of Muhammad, may God's blessings be upon them, and their wives and their likes, and what they used to worship besides God, from idols and others, to increase their sorrow and shame, 'So lead them to the path of Hell.'"""
9,{ٱحْشُرُواْ ٱلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ} حال او مستأنف بتقدير القول، واصل الظّلم الظّلم لآل محمّد (ص) وكلّما نشأ من هذا الظّلم فهو ظلم، واوّل الظّلم لآل محمّد (ص) هو ستر الولاية التّكوينيّة الّتى هى حبل من الله وينشأ منه الظّلم التّكليفىّ وترك الولاية التّكليفيّة، وفسّر الظّلم ههنا بظلم آل محمّد (ص) {وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ} المناسبات لهم {وَمَا كَانُواْ يَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ ٱللَّهِ فَٱهْدُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ ٱلْجَحِيمِ} استعمال الهداية للتّهكّم بهم.,"""Gather those who have wronged"" in a state or as a new sentence with an implied saying, and the root of wrongdoing is the wrongdoing against the family of Muhammad (PBUH), and whatever arises from this wrongdoing is wrongdoing. The first wrongdoing against the family of Muhammad (PBUH) is the concealment of the constitutive guardianship, which is a rope from Allah, and from it arises the obligatory wrongdoing and the abandonment of obligatory guardianship. And wrongdoing is interpreted here as wrongdoing against the family of Muhammad (PBUH). ""And their spouses"" who are related to them ""And what they used to worship besides Allah, so lead them to the path of Hell."" The use of guidance here is for mockery."
