,original_sentence,translation
0,قال جار الله: من المجاز ما غلب عليه الاستعمال حتى لحق بالحقيقة وهذا من ذاك لأن اليمين كالحقيقة في الخير.,"Said Jar Allah: ""Among the metaphors is what has become so prevalent in usage that it has become akin to the truth, and this is one of them, for the oath is like the truth in goodness."""
1,الرابع: أن اليمين القوة والقهر فبها يقع البطش غالباً أي كنتم تأتوننا عن القهر والغلبة حتى حملتمونا على الضلال.,"The fourth: that the oath is power and domination, so with it oppression often occurs, meaning you were coming to us with force and victory until you led us astray."
2,{قَالُوۤاْ} أي: الضعفاء السفلة منهم لرؤسائهم: {إِنَّكُمْ} أيها الضالون المضلون كنتم من شدة شغفكم، وحرصكم على تضليلنا، ومنعنا عن تصديق الرسل وقبول دعوتهم {كُنتُمْ تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ ٱلْيَمِينِ} [الصافات: 28] أي: عن أقوى جوانبنا، أو عن أقوى الطرق الموصلة إلى مطلوبكم منا، وهو المال وحطام الدنيا، فتعطوننا منها، وتحرفوننا عن سبل السلامة وطرق الاستقامة.,"They said, ""You, the misguided and misleading ones, were so eager to mislead us and prevent us from believing the messengers and accepting their call, that you came to us from our strongest side, or from the strongest paths leading to your desired outcome from us, which is wealth and the trinkets of this world. You gave us some of it and turned us away from the paths of safety and righteousness."""
3,قوله: {عَنِ ٱلْيَمِينِ} يطلق على الحلف والجارحة المعلومة والقوة والدين والخير، والآية محتملة لتلك المعاني، والمفسر اختار الأول، وعليه فعن بمعنى من، والمعنى: كنتم تأتوننا من الجهة الني كنا نأمنكم منها؛ فتلك الجهة مصورة بحلفكم أنكم على الحق؛ إلخ.,"His saying: {عَنِ ٱلْيَمِينِ} is used to refer to an oath, the known limb, strength, religion, and good. The verse is susceptible to these meanings, and the interpreter chose the first. Accordingly, ""عن"" means ""from,"" and the meaning is: ""You used to come to us from the direction in which we trusted you; so that direction is depicted by your oath that you are on the right path; etc."""
4,قوله: (المعنى أنكم أضللتمونا) هذا المعنى هو المراد على جميع الاحتمالات، لا على ما قاله المفسر فقط.,"His saying: ""You have led us astray"" - this meaning is intended in all possibilities, not just as the interpreter said."
5,قال قتادة: أقبل الإنس على قرنائهم من الجن يتساءلون، قال الإنس للجن: {إِنَّكُمْ كُنتُمْ تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ ٱلْيَمِينِ} أي: من قبل الدين (والحق) فتخدعوننا بأقوى الوجوه.,"Qatadah said: ""The humans turned to their companions from the jinn, questioning them. The humans said to the jinn: 'Indeed, you used to come to us from the right (i.e., from the side of religion and truth), deceiving us in the strongest ways.'"""
6,وقيل: معنى {(عَنِ) ٱلْيَمِينِ} من جهة أيماننا لأن إبليس اللعين قال: {ثُمَّ لآتِيَنَّهُمْ مِّن بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ وَعَنْ أَيْمَانِهِمْ وَعَن شَمَآئِلِهِمْ} [الأعراف: 17].,"It is said: The meaning of {(عَنِ) ٱلْيَمِينِ} is from the direction of our right, because the accursed Iblees said: {Then I will come to them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left} [Al-A'raf: 17]."
7,وقيل: معنى قوله: {وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ} عنى به المشركين، يقول بعضهم لبعض: كنتم تأتوننا عن اليمين، أي: من الجهة التي نحبها ونتفاءل بها.,"It is said that the meaning of His saying: {And they will turn to one another} refers to the polytheists, saying to one another: ""You used to come to us from the right,"" meaning: from the direction we love and consider auspicious."
8,وقيل: معناه: تأتوننا إتيان من إذا حلف لنا صدقناه.,"It was said: Its meaning is: You come to us as one who, if he swears to us, we believe him."
9,وأما استعارتها للقوة والشدة، فإنها يقع بها البطش، فالمعنى: أنكم تعروننا بقوتكم وتحملوننا على طريق الضلال.,"As for borrowing her strength and severity, it is through it that oppression occurs, so the meaning is: that you oppress us with your strength and lead us astray."
10,وقوله {قالوا إنكم كنتم تأتوننا عن اليمين} أي من جهة الخير والسعادة فاستعمال اليمين فيها شائع كثير كقوله {وأصحاب اليمين ما أصحاب اليمين} الواقعة 27 والمعنى أنكم كنتم تأتوننا من جهة الخير والسعادة فتقطعون الطريق وتحولون بيننا وبين الخير والسعادة وتضلوننا.,"And His saying, ""They said, 'You used to come to us from the right,'"" meaning from the side of good and happiness. The use of the right in this context is common, as in His saying, ""And the companions of the right, what are the companions of the right?"" (Al-Waqi'ah 27). The meaning is that you used to come to us from the side of good and happiness, cutting off the path and preventing us from good and happiness, and leading us astray."
11,وقيل المراد باليمين الدين وهو قريب من الوجه السابق، وقيل المراد باليمين القهر والقوة كما في قوله تعالى {فراغ عليهم ضرباً باليمين} الصافات 93 ولا يخلو من وجه نظراً إلى جواب المتبوعين.,"It was said that the meaning of the right hand is religion, and it is close to the previous interpretation. It was also said that the meaning of the right hand is power and strength, as in His saying, the Exalted, ""Then he struck them with his right hand"" (As-Saffat 93). This is not devoid of meaning, considering the response of the followers."
12,وقال قتادة هو قول الإنس للجنّ، والأوّل أولى لقوله {قَالُواْ إِنَّكُمْ كُنتُمْ تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ ٱلْيَمِينِ} أي كنتم تأتوننا في الدنيا عن اليمين، أي من جهة الحقّ، والدين، والطاعة، وتصدّونا عنها.,"He said, ""It is the statement of humans to the jinn, and the first is more appropriate due to His saying, 'You used to come to us from the right,' meaning you used to come to us in this world from the right, i.e., from the side of truth, religion, and obedience, and you would turn us away from it."""
13,قال الزجاج كنتم تأتوننا من قبل الدين، فتروننا أن الدين، والحق ما تضلوننا به، واليمين عبارة عن الحق، وهذا كقوله تعالى إخباراً عن إبليس {ثُمَّ لآتِيَنَّهُم مّن بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ وَعَنْ أَيْمَـٰنِهِمْ} الأعراف 17 قال الواحدي قال أهل المعاني إن الرّؤساء كانوا قد حلفوا لهؤلاء الأتباع أن ما يدعونهم إليه هو الحق، فوثقوا بأيمانهم فمعنى {تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ ٱلْيَمِينِ} أي من ناحية الأيمان التي كنتم تحلفونها، فوثقنا بها.,"He said, ""You used to come to us from the side of religion, and you would show us that it is religion, and the truth is what you mislead us with, and the oath is an expression of the truth. This is like His saying, the Exalted, informing about Iblees, 'Then I will come to them from before them and behind them and from their right.' Al-A'raf 17. Al-Wahidi said, 'The people of meanings said that the leaders had sworn to these followers that what they were inviting them to was the truth, so they trusted their oaths. So the meaning of 'you come to us from the right' is from the side of the oaths that you were swearing, so we trusted them."""
14,وقيل اليمين بمعنى القوّة، أي تمنعوننا بقوّة، وغلبة، وقهر كما في قوله {فَرَاغَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضَرْباً بِٱلْيَمِينِ} الصافات 93 أي بالقوّة، وهذه الجملة مستأنفة جواب سؤال مقدّر، وكذلك جملة {قَالُواْ بَلْ لَّمْ تَكُونُواْ مُؤْمِنِينَ} فإنها مستأنفة جواب سؤال مقدّر والمعنى أنه قال الرؤساء، أو الشياطين لهؤلاء القائلين كنتم تأتوننا عن اليمين بل لم تكونوا مؤمنين، ولم نمنعكم من الإيمان.,"It was said that the right hand means strength, i.e., you prevent us with strength, dominance, and overpowering, as in His saying, ""Then he turned upon them, striking with his right hand"" (As-Saffat 93), meaning with strength. This sentence is a response to an implied question. Similarly, the sentence ""They said, 'Nay, you were not believers'"" is a response to an implied question. The meaning is that the leaders or the devils said to those who said, ""You used to come to us from the right,"" rather, you were not believers, and we did not prevent you from believing."
15,قال سعيد عن قتادة: أي تأتوننا عن طريق الخير وتصدوننا عنها.,"Said Saeed about Qatada: ""You come to us with the path of goodness and prevent us from it."""
16,وقيل: «تَأَتُونَنَا عَنِ الْيَمِينِ» تأتوننا مجيء من إذا حلف لنا صدّقناه.,"It is said, ""You come to us from the right,"" meaning you come to us as one whose oath we would believe."
17,وقيل: تأتوننا من قِبل الدِّين فتهوِّنون علينا أمر الشريعة وتنفِّروننا عنها.,"It is said: ""You come to us from the side of religion, making the matter of the Shariah easy for us and turning us away from it."""
18,وقال مجاهد: «تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ الْيَمِينِ» أي من قبل الحق أنه معكم وكله متقارب المعنى.,"Mujahid said: ""You come to us from the right,"" meaning from the side of truth, that it is with you, and all of it is close in meaning."
19,{قالوا إنكم كنتم تأتوننا عن اليمين} أي يقول الكفار لِغُواتهم أنكم كنتم تأتوننا من جهة النصيحة واليمن والبركة ولذلك أقررنا لكم والعرب تتيمن بما جاء من اليمين عن الجبائي.,"They said, ""You used to come to us from the right,"" meaning the disbelievers say to their leaders, ""You used to come to us from the side of advice, the right, and blessing, and that is why we followed you."" The Arabs consider the right side auspicious, as mentioned by Al-Jubai'i."
20,وقيل: معناه كنتم تأتوننا من قبل الدين فتروننا أن الحق والدين ما يضلوننا به واليمين عبارة عن الحق عن الزجاج.,"It was said: ""You used to come to us from the religion, showing us that the truth and the religion are what they mislead us with, and the oath is an expression of the truth, according to Az-Zajjaj."""
21,وقيل: معناه كنتم تأتوننا من قبل القوة والقدرة فتخدعوننا من أقوى الوجوه ومنه قوله {فراغ إليهم ضرباً باليمين} [الصافات: 93] عن الفراء.,"It was said: ""You used to come to us with strength and ability, deceiving us in the strongest ways."" And from this is His saying, ""Then he turned upon them, striking with his right hand"" [As-Saffat: 93], according to Al-Farra."
22,28 - قال الضعفاء للذين استكبروا: إنكم كنتم تأتوننا من الناحية التى نظن فيها الخير واليُمن، لتصرفونا عن الحق إلى الضلال.,"28 - The weak said to those who were arrogant: ""You used to come to us from the side from which we thought there was goodness and blessing, to turn us away from the truth to error."""
23,وقوله {قالوا إنكم كنتم تأتوننا عن اليمين} حكاية ما يقول الكفار لمن قبلوا منهم إنكم: كنتم تأتوننا من جهة النصيحة واليمن والبركة، فلذلك اغتررنا بكم والعرب تتيمن بما جاء من جهة اليمين.,"""His saying, 'They said, 'You used to come to us from the right,' is a recounting of what the disbelievers say to those who accepted from them: 'You used to come to us from the side of advice, the right, and blessing, so we were deceived by you.' And the Arabs consider auspicious what comes from the right side."""
24,وقال الفراء: معناه إنكم كنتم تأتوننا من قبل اليمين، فتخدعوننا من اقوى الوجوه.,"He said: ""You used to come to us from the right, deceiving us with the strongest arguments."""
25,واليمين القوة ومنه قوله {فراغ عليهم ضرباً باليمين} أي بالقوة ثم حكى ما يقول اولئك لهم في جواب ذلك: ليس الأمر على ما قلتم بل لم تكونوا مصدقين بالله ولم يكن لنا عليكم في ترك الحق من سلطان ولا قدرة فلا تسقطوا اللوم عن أنفسكم فانه لازم لكم ولا حق بكم.,"And the right is strength, and from it is His saying, ""Then he struck them with his right hand,"" meaning with strength. Then He narrated what those would say to them in response to that: ""The matter is not as you say, but you were not believers in Allah, and we had no authority over you in abandoning the truth, nor any power. So do not blame yourselves, for it is binding upon you, and you have no right."""
26,كما تدل عليه آيات منها قوله - تعالى - {وَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِ ٱلظَّالِمُونَ مَوْقُوفُونَ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ يَرْجِعُ بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَىٰ بَعْضٍ ٱلْقَوْلَ يَقُولُ ٱلَّذِينَ ٱسْتُضْعِفُواْ لِلَّذِينَ ٱسْتَكْبَرُواْ لَوْلاَ أَنتُمْ لَكُنَّا مُؤْمِنِينَ} ثم حكى - سبحانه - ما قاله الضعفاء للزعماء فقال {قَالُوۤاْ إِنَّكُمْ كُنتُمْ تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ ٱلْيَمِينِ} وللمفسرين فى تأويل معنى اليمين هنا اتجاهات منها أن المراد باليمين هنا الجهة التى هى جهة الخير واليمن أى قال الضعفاء للرؤساء إنكم كنتم فى الدنيا توهموننا وتخدعوننا بالبقاء على ما نحن عليه من عبادة الأصنام والأوثان، لأن بقاءنا على ذلك فيه الخير واليمن والسلامة.,"As indicated by verses, including His saying - the Most High - {And if you could see when the wrongdoers are standing before their Lord, they will argue among themselves. Those who were oppressed will say to those who were arrogant, 'If it were not for you, we would have been believers.'} Then He - the Exalted - narrated what the weak said to the leaders, saying {They said, 'You used to come to us from the right.'} And the exegetes have different interpretations of the meaning of the right here, including that the right refers to the side of good and blessing, i.e., the weak said to the leaders, 'In this world, you deceived us and led us astray by keeping us on our worship of idols and statues, because our persistence in that was good, blessed, and safe.'"
27,إنكم كنتم تأتوننا عن اليمين: أي عن يمين أحدنا تزينون له الباطل وتحسِّنون له الشر فتأمرونه بالشرك وتنهونه عن التوحيد.,"""You used to come to us from the right: that is, from the right side of one of us, making evil seem good to him and beautifying evil for him, commanding him to associate partners with Allah and forbidding him from monotheism."""
28,فقال الأتباع من الإِنس لقرنائهم من الجن ما أخبر تعالى به عنهم {إِنَّكُمْ كُنتُمْ تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ ٱلْيَمِينِ} أي والشمال أي توسوسون لنا فَتْحَسِّنُون لنا الشرك والشر بل تأمروننا به وتحضوننا عليه.,"So the human followers said to their companions from the jinn, ""You used to come to us from the right and the left, i.e., you would whisper to us, making us see evil and wickedness as good, and even commanding us to do it and urging us to do it."""
29,{قَالُوۤاْ} أي قالت الإِنس للجن أو ضعفة الإِنس الكفرة لكبرائهم وقادتهم واليمين الجارحة وليست مرادة هنا فقيل استعيرت لجهة الخير أو للشدة والقوة.,"They said, meaning the humans said to the jinn or the weak humans, the disbelievers, to their leaders and chiefs, and the oath is not intended here, so it was borrowed for the side of goodness or for severity and strength."
30,{(28) قَالُوا إِنَّكُمْ كُنْتُمْ تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ الْيَمِينِ} قيل يعني عن اقوى الوجوه وايمنه.,"They said, ""You used to come to us from the right,"" meaning from the strongest and most blessed side."
