,original_sentence,translation
0,كان رسول الله يحب التيامن في كل شيء ولهذا أمرت الشريعة بمباشرة أفاضل الأمور باليمين وأراطلها بالشمال، وجعلت اليمين لكاتب الحسنات والشمال لكاتب السيآت، ووعد المحسن أن يؤتى كتابه بيمينه والمسيء بالضد، وما جعلت يمنى إلا للتيمن بها ولذلك تيمنوا بالسانح وتطيروا بالبارح.,"The Messenger of Allah loved to begin with the right in everything, and for this reason, the Shariah commanded that the best of things be done with the right hand and the worst with the left. The right hand was made for the writer of good deeds and the left for the writer of bad deeds. The doer of good was promised that his book would be given to him in his right hand, and the doer of evil the opposite. The right hand was not made except for good fortune, and that is why they considered the right side auspicious and the left side inauspicious."
1,فقيل: أتاه عن اليمين أي من قبل الخير وناحيته فصدّه عنه وأضله.,"It was said: ""He came to him from the right, that is, from the side of good, and turned him away from it and misled him."""
2,"ثم صار قولك \"" أتاه عن اليمين \"" مجازاً في المعنى المذكور.","Then your saying ""he came from the right"" became a metaphor in the mentioned meaning."
3,واليمين: القوة والقدرة في كلام العرب.,The right: strength and ability in the speech of the Arabs.
4,فمن أتاه الشيطان (من) عن يمينه أتاه من قبل الذين فيلبس عليه الحق، ومن أتاه (من) عن شماله أتاه من جهة الشهوات، ومن أتاه من بين يديه أتاه من جهة التكذيب بالجزاء والبعث، ومن أتاه من خلفه أتاه من جهة الفقر على نفسه وعلى من يخلفه بعده.,"So whoever comes to him from his right, comes to him from the side of those who confuse the truth, and whoever comes to him from his left, comes to him from the side of desires, and whoever comes to him from before him, comes to him from the side of denying the recompense and the resurrection, and whoever comes to him from behind him, comes to him from the side of poverty for himself and for those who come after him."
5,وعن اليمين: من قبل الدين أيضاً.,And on the right: also from the religion.
6,"وقال قتادة أيضاً: \"" عن اليمين \"": من قبل الخير فتنهوننا عنه.","And Qatadah also said: ""As for the oath"": from before the good, you forbid us from it."
7,"وقال السدي: \"" عن اليمين \"": من قبل الدين، به يزينون لنا بالباطل ويصدوننا عن الحق.","He said, ""As for the oath"": from the religion, with it they adorn for us falsehood and turn us away from the truth."
8,والعرب تتفاءل / بما جاء عن اليمين وتسميه السانح.,The Arabs are optimistic / about what comes from the right and call it the Sanih.
9,و {اليمين}: الجارحة، وليست مرادة هنا.,"and {the right hand}: the limb, and it is not intended here."
10,وأما استعارتها لجهة الشهوات، فلأن جهة اليمين هي الجهة الثقيلة من الإنسان وفيها كبده، وجهة شماله فيها قلبه ومكره، وهي أخف، والمنهزم يرجع على شقه الأيسر، إذ هو أخف شقيه.,"As for its metaphorical use in the context of desires, it is because the right side is the heavier side of a person, and it contains his liver, while his left side contains his heart and his deceit, and it is lighter. The defeated person retreats to his left side, as it is the lighter of his two sides."
11,وقيل المعنى تأتوننا عن اليمين التي نحبها، ونتفاءل بها، لتغرّونا بذلك عن جهة النصح، والعرب تتفاءل بما جاء عن اليمين، وتسميه السانح.,"It was said that the meaning is that you come to us from the right side, which we love and are optimistic about, to deceive us from the side of advice. The Arabs are optimistic about what comes from the right side and call it the sanih."
12,وبيانه: أن العرب كانت تتيمّن بالسانح عن اليمين من الطير، ويناسبه ما ذكره ابن عطية في جملة التأويلات بقوله: ومنها: أن يريد باليمين اليمْن، أي: تأتوننا من جهة النصائح، والعمل الذي يتيمّن به.,"And its explanation: The Arabs used to take omens from the right side of birds, and this corresponds to what Ibn Attiyah mentioned in a collection of interpretations, saying: ""Among them is that by 'right' he means blessings, i.e., you come to us from the direction of advice and the action that is considered auspicious."""
13,قلت: والأحسن: أن يقدر معلق الجار، أي: تأتوننا وتصرفوننا عن طريق أهل اليمين.,"I said: ""It is better: to estimate the prepositional phrase, that is: you come to us and turn us away from the path of the righteous."""
14,وقيل: تأتوننا عن اليمين التي نحبها ونتفاءل بها لتغرونا بذلك من جهة النصح.,"It was said: ""You come to us from the right, which we love and take as an auspicious sign, to deceive us in the guise of advice."""
15,قلت: وهذا القول حسن جداً لأن من جهة الدِّين يكون الخير والشر، واليمين بمعنى الدِّين أي كنتم تزينون لنا الضلالة.,"I said: This saying is very good, for from the perspective of religion, there is good and evil, and the right hand means religion, that is, you were beautifying for us the misguidance."
16,وقيل: اليمين بمعنى القوّة أي تمنعوننا بقوّة وغلبة وقهر قال الله تعالى: {فَرَاغَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضَرْباً بِٱلْيَمِينِ} [الصافات: 93] أي بالقوّة وقوّة الرجل في يمينه وقال الشاعر: إذا مَا رَايةٌ رُفِعتْ لمجدٍ تَلّقاها عَرابَةُ باليمين أي بالقوّة والقدرة.,"It was said: ""The oath"" means strength, i.e., you prevent us with strength, dominance, and power. Allah the Exalted said: {Then he turned on them, striking with his right hand} [As-Saffat: 93], meaning with strength. And the strength of a man is in his right hand. The poet said: ""If a banner is raised for glory, 'Arabah receives it with the right hand,"" meaning with strength and ability."
17,وإلى هذا المعنى أشار صاحب الكشاف بقوله اليمين لما كانت أشرف العضوين وأمتنهما، وكانوا يتيمنون بها، فبها يصافحون، ويماسحون، ويناولون ويتناولون، ويزاولون أكثر الأمور.,"To this meaning, the author of Al-Kashshaf referred by saying, ""The right hand, being the most honorable and strongest of the two, and they would seek blessings from it, so with it they would greet, shake hands, give and receive, and perform most of their affairs."""
18,لما كانت استعيرت لجهة الخير وجانبه، فقيل أتاه عن اليمين، أى من الخير وناحيته … ومنهم من يرى أن المراد باليمين هنا اليمين الشرعية التى هى القسم، وعن بمعنى الباء.,"When it is borrowed for the sake of goodness and its side, it is said that it came from the right, meaning from goodness and its direction… And some of them see that what is meant by the right here is the legal right which is the oath, and ""عن"" means ""ب""."
19,ومنهم من يرى أن المراد باليمين هنا القوة والغلبة.,"And among them, some see that the meaning of the right here is power and dominance."
