,original_sentence,translation
0,ثم وصف منكوحهم بقوله {وعندهم قاصرات الطرف} أي حابساتها عن غير أزواجهن كقوله {عرباً} [الواقعة: 37] والعين جمع العيناء مؤنث الأعين وهو كبير العين.,"Then he described their wives as {and with them are those with downcast eyes} [Al-Waqi'ah: 56], meaning those who restrain their eyes from looking at others, as in {Arab} [Al-Waqi'ah: 37]. And the word ""ain"" is the plural of ""ainaa,"" the feminine of ""a'in,"" which means large-eyed."
1,قوله {قَاصِرَاتُ ٱلطَّرْفِ} يعني الأزواج قصرن طرفهن على أزواجهن لا يردن غيرهم {عِينٌ} عظام العيون الواحدة منهن عيناء.,"His saying, ""Those with downcast eyes"" means the wives who lower their eyes for their husbands, not desiring anyone else. ""Large-eyed"" means those with large eyes, each of them is large-eyed."
2,وقوله {وعندهم قاصرات الطرف عين} وصف للحور التي يرزقونها وقصور طرفهن كناية عن نظرهن نظرة الغنج والدلال ويؤيده ذكر العين بعده وهو جمع عيناء مؤنث أعين وهي الواسعة العين في جمال.,"""And His saying, 'And with them are those restrained in glances, wide-eyed,' is a description of the houris that they will be given. Their restrained glances are a metaphor for their coquettish and alluring looks. This is supported by the mention of 'wide-eyed' afterwards, which is the plural of 'aina', the feminine of 'a'in, meaning those with wide, beautiful eyes."""
3,وقيل المراد بقاصرات الطرف أنهن قصرن طرفهن على أزواجهن لا يردن غيرهم لحبهن لهم، وبالعين أن أعينهن شديدة في سوادها شديدة في بياضها.,"It is said that ""those with downcast eyes"" means that they have lowered their gaze for their husbands, desiring none other than them, and that their eyes are intensely black and intensely white."
4,ولما ذكر سبحانه صفة مشروبهم ذكر عقبه صفة منكوحهم، فقال {وَعِندَهُمْ قَـٰصِرٰتُ ٱلطَّرْفِ} أي نساء قصرن طرفهنّ على أزواجهنّ، فلا يردن غيرهم، والقصر معناه الحبس، ومنه قول امرىء القيس من القاصرات الطرف لو دب محول من الذرّ فوق الأتب منها لأثرا والمحول الصغير من الذرّ، والأتب القميص، وقيل القاصرات المحبوسات على أزواجهنّ، والأوّل أولى لأنه قال قاصرات الطرف.,"And when He, the Exalted, mentioned the description of their drink, He immediately mentioned the description of their wives, saying, ""And with them are those restrained in glance"" (Qur'an 37:48), meaning women who restrain their glances to their husbands, so they do not desire others. The meaning of restraint is imprisonment, and from this is the saying of Imru' al-Qays, ""Among the women with restrained glances, if a small ant were to crawl on her shirt, it would leave a mark."" The small ant is the ""mahwal,"" and the shirt is the ""atab."" It has also been said that the restrained ones are those imprisoned with their husbands, but the first interpretation is more appropriate because it says, ""restrained in glance."""
5,والعين عظام العيون جمع عيناء، وهي الواسعة العين.,"The eye is the bone of the eyes, a collection of wide-eyed ones."
6,6 - الكناية {قَاصِرَاتُ ٱلطَّرْفِ} كنَّى بذلك عن الحور العين لأنهن عفيفات لا ينظرن إلى غير أزواجهن.,6 - Metaphor {قَاصِرَاتُ ٱلطَّرْفِ} This refers to the Houris (beautiful women in Paradise) as they are chaste and do not look at anyone other than their husbands.
