,original_sentence,translation
0,وروي عن النعمان بن بشير يرويه عن عمر ابن الخطاب وتأويله أنهن الأزواج الموافقات لهم في الإِشراك، أما من آمن فهن ناجيات من تبعات أزواجهن وهذا كذكر أزواج المؤمنين في قوله تعالى {هم وأزواجهم في ظلال} يس 56 فإن المراد أزواجهم المؤمنات فأطلق حملاً على المقيّد في قوله {ومن صلح من آبائهم وأزواجهم وذرياتهم} الرعد 23وذكر الأزواج إبلاغ في الوعيد والإِنذار لئلا يحسبوا أن النساء المشركات لا تبعة عليهن.,"It is narrated from Al-Nu'man bin Bashir, who narrates it from Umar ibn Al-Khattab, and its interpretation is that they are the wives who agree with them in polytheism. As for those who believe, they are saved from the consequences of their husbands. This is like mentioning the wives of the believers in His saying, the Exalted: ""They and their spouses will be in shade"" (Ya-Sin 56), for the meaning is their believing wives. It is mentioned absolutely based on the qualified in His saying: ""And those who believed and whose offspring followed them in faith - We will join with them their offspring"" (Ar-Ra'd 23). Mentioning the wives is an intensification of the threat and warning, lest they think that polytheistic women have no consequences for them."
1,وذلك مثل تخصيصهن بالذكر في قوله تعالى {الحر بالحر والعبد بالعبد والأنثى بالأنثى} في سورة البقرة 178.,"That is like mentioning them specifically in His saying, the Exalted: {A free for a free, a slave for a slave, and a female for a female} in Surah Al-Baqarah 178."
2,وقيل الأزواج الأصناف، أي أشياعهم في الشرك وفروعه.,"It was said that the pairs are the kinds, that is, their followers in polytheism and its branches."
3,وفي أزواجهم أربعة أقوال: أحدها: أمثالهم وأشباههم، وهو قول عمر، وابن عباس، والنعمان بن بشير، ومجاهد في أخرين.,"""Regarding their spouses, there are four sayings: one of them is: their equals and likenesses, and this is the saying of Umar, Ibn Abbas, An-Nu'man bin Bashir, and Mujahid among others."""
4,الثالث: أشياعهم، قاله قتادة، ومنه قول الشاعر: فكبا الثور في وسيل وروض مونق النبت شامل الأزواج الرابع: نساؤهم الموافقات على الكفر، رواه النعمان بن بشير عن عمر بن الخطاب رضي الله عنه.,"Third: Their followers, as stated by Qatada. The poet said: ""The bull stumbled in a stream and a beautiful, lush garden."" Fourth: Their women who agree on disbelief, narrated by An-Nu'man bin Bashir from Umar bin Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him."
5,"قال ابن عباس: \"" وأزواجهم \"" نظراؤهم وأتباعهم في الظلم.","Ibn Abbas said: ""And their spouses"" means their peers and followers in injustice."
6,"وقال ابن زيد: \"" وأزواجهم \"" في الأعمال.","And Ibn Zaid said: ""And their spouses"" in deeds."
7,"وقال مجاهد: \"" وأزواجهم \"" أمثالهم.","And Mujahid said: ""And their spouses"" are their equals."
8,وقال أهل اللغة: أزواجهم قرناؤهم، (و) منه زوجت الرجل، (أي) قرنته بامرأة.,"The people of language say: their spouses are their companions, and from this is the phrase ""I married the man,"" meaning I joined him with a woman."
9,وقرأ عيسى بن سليمان الحجازي: {وأزواجهم}، مرفوعاً عطفاً على ضمير ظلموا، أي وظلم أزواجهم.,"And Isa bin Sulaiman al-Hijazi recited: {And their spouses}, raised as an annex to the pronoun they wronged, meaning and they wronged their spouses."
10,حدثنـي مـحمد بن عمرو، قال: ثنا أبو عاصم، قال: ثنا عيسى وحدثنـي الـحارث، قال: ثنا الـحسن، قال: ثنا ورقاء، جميعاً عن ابن أبـي نـجيح، عن مـجاهد، قوله: {وأزْوَاجَهُم} ْ قال: أمثالهم.,"Narrated to me Muhammad bin Amr, he said: Narrated to us Abu Asim, he said: Narrated to us Isa. And narrated to me Al-Harith, he said: Narrated to us Al-Hasan, he said: Narrated to us Warqa', both from Ibn Abi Najih, from Mujahid, his saying: {And their spouses} he said: Their likes."
11,قوله: {وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ} العامة على نصبه وفيه وجهان: أحدهما: العطف على الموصول.,"His saying: {وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ} is generally in the accusative case, and there are two aspects to it: one of them is the conjunction with the relative pronoun."
12,فصل المراد بالأزواج أشباههم وأمثالهم وأتباعهم.,"The meaning of ""azwaj"" is their likes, their kinds, and their followers."
13,وقال ابن عباس: «وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ» أي أشباههم.,"And Ibn Abbas said: ""And their spouses"" means their counterparts."
14,وقيل: «وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ» نساؤهم الموافقات على الكفر قاله مجاهد والحسن، ورواه النعمان بن بشير عن عمر بن الخطاب.,"It is said: ""And their wives"" are their women who agree with them in disbelief, as stated by Mujahid and Al-Hasan, and narrated by An-Nu'man bin Bashir from Umar bin Al-Khattab."
15,{وَأَزْوٰجُهُمْ} وأشباههم عابد الصنم مع عبدة الصنم وعابد الكوكب مع عبدته كقوله تعالى: {وَكُنتُمْ أَزْوَاجاً ثَلَـٰثَةً} [الواقعة: 7] أو نساءهم اللاتي على دينهم أو قرناءهم من الشياطين.,"""And their spouses"" and their likes, the idol worshipper with the idol worshippers, and the star worshipper with its worshippers, as His saying, the Exalted: {And you will be divided into three categories} [Al-Waqiah: 7], or their women who are of their religion, or their companions from the devils."
16,وقيل المراد بأزواجهم.,It was said that the meaning of their spouses.
17,إلا أن تفسير الأزواج هنا بالأشباه والنظائر والأصناف أولى، خصوصا وأن إطلاق الأزواج على الأصناف والأشباه جاء كثيرا فى القرآن الكريم ومن ذلك قوله - تعالى - {سُبْحَانَ ٱلَّذِي خَلَق ٱلأَزْوَاجَ كُلَّهَا مِمَّا تُنبِتُ ٱلأَرْضُ وَمِنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ وَمِمَّا لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ} والمراد بما كانوا يعبدونه الآلهة الباطلة التى كانوا فى الدنيا يعبدونها من دون الله، كالأصنام والأوثان.,"However, interpreting the term ""azwaj"" here as ""likes,"" ""similarities,"" and ""kinds"" is more appropriate, especially since the term ""azwaj"" is often used in the Holy Quran to refer to kinds and similarities, such as in the saying of the Almighty: ""Glory be to Him who created all the pairs of all things that the earth produces, as well as their own (human) kinds and of things they know not."" The intended meaning here is the false deities that they used to worship in this world besides Allah, such as idols and statues."
18,قلنا: الزوج يعني المفرد ومعه مثله.,We said: The husband means the single one and with him is like him.
19,فلا نقول على الرجل والمرأة زوج، إنما زوجان، الرجل يسمى زوج والمرأة تسمى زوج، لا أن الزوج يعني الاثنين كما يظن البعض، ومثلها كلمة توأم، فكل واحد منهما يُسمَّى توأم، وهما معاً توأمان لذلك قال تعالى في سورة الأنعام: {ثَمَٰنِيَةَ أَزْوَٰجٍ مَّنَ ٱلضَّأْنِ ٱثْنَيْنِ وَمِنَ ٱلْمَعْزِ ٱثْنَيْنِ قُلْ ءَآلذَّكَرَيْنِ حَرَّمَ أَمِ ٱلأُنثَيَيْنِ …} [الأنعام: 143].,"We do not say that a man and a woman are a couple, but rather, a couple. The man is called a spouse and the woman is called a spouse. It is not that the term spouse means two, as some people think. Similarly, the word twin; each of them is called a twin, and together they are twins. Therefore, Allah said in Surah Al-An'am: {Eight pairs: Of sheep two pairs, and of goats two pairs; Say, hath He forbidden the two males, or the two females, or (the females) which are pregnant to their (male) kind, or male and female together? Inform me with knowledge if ye are truthful.} [Al-An'am: 143]."
20,فلو أن الزوج يُطلق على الاثنين لقال: أربعة أزواج.,"If the husband were to be called two, he would say: four spouses."
21,الفائدة الثانية: اختلفوا في المراد بأزواجهم وفيه ثلاثة أقوال الأول: المراد بأزواجهم أشباههم أي أحزابهم ونظراؤهم من الكفر فاليهودي مع اليهودي والنصراني مع النصراني والذي يدل على جواز أن يكون المراد من الأزواج الأشباه وجوه الأول: قوله تعالى: {وَكُنتُمْ أَزْوَاجاً ثَلَـٰثَةً} [الواقعة: 7] أي أشكالاً وأشباهاً الثاني: أنك تقول عندي من هذا أزواج أي أمثال وتقول زوجان من الخف لكون كل واحد منهما نظير الآخر وكذلك الرجل والمرأة سميا زوجين لكونهما متشابهين في أكثر أحكام النكاح وكذلك العدد الزوج سمي بهذا الاسم لكون كل واحد من سميه مثالاً للقسم الثاني في العدد الصحيح، قال الواحدي فعلى هذا القول يجب أن يكون المراد بالذين ظلموا الرؤساء لأنك لو جعلت الذين ظلموا عاماً في كل من أشرك لم يكن للأزواج معنى القول الثاني: في تفسير الأزواج أن المراد قرناؤهم من الشياطين لقوله تعالى: {وإخوانهم يمدونهم في الغي ثم لا يقصرون} [الأعراف: 202]، والقول الثالث: أن المراد نساؤهم اللواتي على دينهم.,"The second benefit: They differed in the meaning of ""their spouses"" and there are three sayings. The first: the meaning of ""their spouses"" is their counterparts, i.e., their parties and peers in disbelief, so the Jew with the Jew and the Christian with the Christian. What indicates that it is permissible for the meaning of ""spouses"" to be the counterparts are the following points: First: His saying, the Exalted: {And you will be three kinds} [Al-Waqiah: 7], meaning forms and counterparts. Second: You say, ""I have pairs of this,"" meaning examples, and you say, ""two pairs of shoes"" because each one is a counterpart of the other, and similarly, the man and the woman are called spouses because they are similar in most of the rulings of marriage, and similarly, the even number is called by this name because each one of its names is an example of the second part in the correct number. Al-Wahidi said, ""According to this saying, it must be that the meaning of 'those who wronged' is the leaders, because if you make 'those who wronged' general for everyone who associates partners, there would be no meaning for 'spouses.' The second saying: in the interpretation of 'spouses' that the meaning is their companions from the devils, due to His saying, the Exalted: {And their brothers incite them to vice, then they do not hold back} [Al-A'raf: 202]. And the third saying: that the meaning is their wives who are of their religion."
22,وقوله تعالى: {وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ} جمهور أهل العلم منهم: عمر وابن عباس، على أن المراد به أشباههم ونظراؤهم، فعابد الوثن مع عابد الوثن، والسارق مع السارق، والزاني مع الزاني، واليهودي مع اليهودي، والنصراني مع النصراني، وهكذا وإطلاق الأزواج على الأصناف مشهور في القرآن، وفي كلام العرب كقوله تعالى: {وَٱلَّذِي خَلَقَ ٱلأَزْوَاجَ كُلَّهَا} [الزخرف: 12] الآية.,"And His saying, the Most High: {And their spouses}, the majority of the scholars, including Umar and Ibn Abbas, are of the opinion that it refers to their likes and counterparts. So, the idolater with the idolater, the thief with the thief, the adulterer with the adulterer, the Jew with the Jew, and the Christian with the Christian, and so on. The term ""spouses"" is commonly used in the Quran and in the speech of the Arabs to refer to kinds or categories, as in His saying, the Most High: {And He who created all the kinds} [Az-Zukhruf: 12]."
23,فالزوج: هو اسم لشكله واسم لضده اسم لهما جميعاً.,"The husband: it is a name for his form and a name for his opposite, a name for both of them."
