,original_sentence,translation
0,{فَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ} يعني أهل الجنة.,"So they turned to one another, questioning."
1,{وأقبل بعضهم على بعض} يعني: الأتباع والرُّؤساء {يتساءلون} يتخاصمون.,"""Some of them turned to one another,"" meaning: the followers and the leaders, ""questioning each other,"" arguing."
2,ثم قال: {وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ}.,Then he said: {And they turned to one another in question.}
3,قوله تعالى {وأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتساءلون} إلى قوله {إنا كنا غاوين} تخاصم واقع بين الأتباع والمتبوعين يوم القيامة، والتعبير عنه بالتساؤل لأنه في معنى سؤال بعضهم بعضاً تلاوماً وتعاتباً يقول التابعون لمتبوعيهم لم أضللتمونا؟,"""His saying, the Exalted, 'And they will turn to one another, questioning,' to His saying, 'Indeed, we were astray.' It is a dispute that occurs between the followers and their leaders on the Day of Resurrection, and it is expressed as questioning because it means that they ask each other in reproach and blame. The followers will say to their leaders, 'Why did you mislead us?'"""
4,فقوله {وأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتساءلون} البعض الأول هم المعترضون والبعض الثاني المعترض عليهم كما يعطيه سياق التساؤل وتساؤلهم تخاصمهم.,"His saying, ""And they turned to one another questioning,"" the first group are the objectors and the second group are those objected to, as indicated by the context of the questioning and their questioning is their disputing."
5,فقوله {فأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتساءلون} ضمير الجمع لأهل الجنة من عباد الله المخلصين وتساؤلهم - كما تقدم - سؤال بعضهم عن بعض وما جرى عليه.,"""His saying, 'Then they turned to one another, questioning,' the pronoun of plurality refers to the people of Paradise, the devoted servants of Allah, and their questioning, as mentioned earlier, is one asking about the other and what happened to them."""
6,{وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَاءلُونَ} أي أقبل بعض الكفار على بعض يتساءلون.,"""And they turned to one another, questioning."" That is, some of the disbelievers turned to one another, questioning."
7,قيل هم الأتباع، والرّؤساء يسأل بعضهم بعضاً سؤال توبيخ وتقريع ومخاصمة.,"It was said, ""They are the followers, and the leaders question each other with reproach, blame, and dispute."""
8,وأخرج ابن المنذر، وابن أبي حاتم عن ابن عباس في قوله {وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَاءلُونَ} قال ذلك إذا بعثوا في النفخة الثانية.,"""And Ibn al-Mundhir and Ibn Abi Hatim narrated from Ibn Abbas regarding His saying {And they turned to one another in question} [Qur'an 37:27], he said: That is when they are resurrected in the second blowing [of the trumpet]."""
9,{وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ} يعني الرؤساء والأتباع {يَتَسَآءَلُونَ} يتخاصمون.,"""And they turned to one another, the leaders and the followers, questioning each other, quarreling."""
10,وقيل: يقبل الأتباع على المتبوعين والمتبوعون على الأتباع يتلاومون ويتعاتبون ويتخاصمون.,"It is said: The followers turn to the leaders, and the leaders turn to the followers, blaming each other, reproaching each other, and quarreling."
11,27 - وأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتلاومون ويتخاصمون، ويسأل بعضهم بعضاً عن مصيرهم السيئ.,"27 - They turned to one another, blaming and quarreling, and asking each other about their miserable fate."
12,وقوله {وأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتساءلون} اخبار منه تعالى إن كل واحد من الكفار يقبل على صاحبه الذي اغواه على وجه التأنيب والتضعيف له يسأله لم غررتني؟,"""And His saying, 'And they turn to one another, questioning,' is His news that each of the disbelievers turns to his companion who misled him, reproaching and weakening him, asking, 'Why did you deceive me?'"""
13,ثم يحكى - سبحانه - ما يدور بينهم من مجادلات يوم القيامة فيقول {وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ} ويبدو أن التساؤل والتجادل هنا، يكون بين الأتباع والمتبوعين، أو بين العامة والزعماء.,"Then He - the Exalted - narrates what will occur between them of arguments on the Day of Resurrection, saying: {And they will turn to one another, questioning each other}. And it seems that the questioning and arguing here will be between the followers and the leaders, or between the common people and the chiefs."
14,ثم يحكى القرآن بعد ذلك أن الرؤساء قد ردوا عليهم بخمسة أجوبة.,Then the Quran recounts that the leaders responded to them with five answers.
15,كيف ينصر بعضهم بعضا في مثل هذا الموقف الرهيب بل هم اليوم مستسلمون أي منقادون ذليلون وقوله تعالى {وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ} أي أقبل الأتباع على المتبوعين يتساءلون أي يتلاومون كلّ يلقي بالمسؤولية على الآخر.,"How do they help each other in such a terrible situation? Rather, they are today submissive, humiliated. And His saying, the Exalted, {And they will turn to one another and question each other} [23:101] means: the followers will turn to the leaders and question each other, blaming each other, each one placing the responsibility on the other."
16,{وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ} هم جن وإنس وتساؤلهم على معنى التقريع والندم والسخط.,"""And they turned to one another,"" they are jinn and humans, and their questioning is out of reproach, regret, and displeasure."
17,{(27) وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ} يسأل بعضهم بعضاً للتوبيخ.,"And they turned to one another, questioning."
18,{مُّتَقَـٰبِلِينَ} متساويين في التواصل والتوادد.,"""Facing each other,"" equal in communication and affection."
