,original_sentence,translation
0,واستظهر بعضهم أن المغوين أشد عذاباً وذلك في مقابلة أوزارهم وأوزار أمثال أوزارهم فالشركة لا تقتضي المساواة والحق أن الآيات مسوقة لبيان اشتراكهم في الظلم والجرم والعذاب اللاحق بهم من قبله، ويمكن مع ذلك أن يلحق بكل من المتبوعين والتابعين ألوان من العذاب ناشئة عن خصوص شأنهم قال تعالى {وليحملن أثقالهم وأثقالاً مع أثقالهم} العنكبوت 13، وقال {ربنا هؤلاء أضلونا فآتهم عذاباً ضعفاً من النار قال لكل ضعف ولكن لا تعلمون} الأعراف 38.,"Some of them have argued that the misleaders will be subjected to a more severe punishment, and this is in exchange for their sins and the sins of those like them. Partnership does not necessitate equality. The truth is that the verses are meant to explain their shared injustice, crime, and the punishment that will befall them from it. Nevertheless, it is possible that each of the leaders and followers will be subjected to various forms of punishment arising from their specific circumstances. Allah, the Exalted, said, ""And they will surely bear their burdens and other burdens along with their burdens,"" (Al-Ankabut 13), and He said, ""Our Lord, these are the ones who led us astray, so give them a double punishment from the Fire. He said, 'For each is a double, but you do not know.'"" (Al-A'raf 38)."
1,وهو يعلم أن ذلك له وهذا كقوله أبطحاء مكة هذا الذي أراه عيانــــا وهذا أنا؟ قال ولهذا عقبه بقوله {إن هذا لهو الفوز العظيم} انتهى.,"He knows that this is for him, and this is like his saying, ""The valley of Mecca, this is what I see with my own eyes, and this is me?"" He said, ""And that is why he followed it with his saying, 'Indeed, this is the great success.'"" End."
2,وقوله {إن هذا لهو الفوز العظيم} هو من تمام قول القائل المذكور وفيه إعظام لموهبة الخلود وارتفاع العذاب وشكر للنعمة.,"His saying, ""Indeed, this is the great success,"" is part of the speech of the mentioned speaker, and it includes glorification of the gift of immortality, the lifting of torment, and gratitude for the blessing."
3,وقوله {لمثل هذا فليعمل العاملون} ظاهر السياق أنه من قول القائل المذكور والإِشارة بهذا إلى الفوز أو الثواب أي لمثل هذا الفوز أو الثواب فليعمل العاملون في دار التكليف، وقيل هو من قول الله سبحانه وقيل من قول أهل الجنة.,"""And His saying, 'For such a thing, let the workers work,' the apparent context indicates that it is from the speech of the mentioned speaker, and the reference with this is to victory or reward, that is, for such victory or reward, let the workers work in the abode of responsibility. It has been said that it is from the speech of God, the Exalted, and it has been said that it is from the speech of the people of Paradise."""
4,وهو أسلوب ساخر لاذع يظهر فيه التشفي من ذلك القرين الكافر، والتحدث بنعمة الله عليه قال تعالى {إِنَّ هَـٰذَا لَهُوَ ٱلْفَوْزُ ٱلْعَظِيمُ} أي إن هذا النعيم الذي ناله أهل الجنة لهو الفوز العظيم {لِمِثْلِ هَـٰذَا فَلْيَعْمَلِ ٱلْعَامِلُون} أي لمثل هذا الجزاء الكريم يجب أن يعمل العاملون ويجتهد المجتهدون.,"It is a sarcastic and biting style in which one expresses gloating over that disbelieving companion, and speaks of the blessing of God upon him. He said, ""Indeed, this is the great victory"" (Quran 53:18), meaning that this bliss which the people of Paradise have attained is the great victory. ""For such a reward let the workers work"" (Quran 87:22), meaning for such a generous recompense the workers should work and the diligent should strive."
5,{لاَ يَمَسُّهُمْ فِيهَا نَصَبٌ} أي تعب مما يقاسونه في الدنيا وإذا انتفى المس انتفت الديمومة وأكد انتفاء الإِخراج بدخول الباء في بمخرجين ومنها متعلق بمخرجين ولما تقدم ذكر ما في النار وذكر ما في الجنة أكد تعالى تنبيئه الناس وتقرير ذلك وتمكينه في النفوس بقوله: {نَبِّىءْ عِبَادِي} وناسب ذكر الغفران والرحمة اتصال ذلك بقوله: ان المتقين.,"""In it, they will not be touched by any fatigue from what they endured in the world. And when the touch is negated, the permanence is negated. And He confirmed the negation of their being taken out by the entry of the letter 'ba' in 'bimukhrijin,' and some of it is related to 'bimukhrijin.' And because what is in the Fire and what is in Paradise were mentioned earlier, Allah, the Exalted, emphasized informing His servants and establishing that in their souls by saying: 'Inform My servants.' And it is appropriate to mention forgiveness and mercy in connection with His saying: 'Indeed, the righteous.'"""
6,وتقديماً لهذين الوصفين العظيمين اللذين وصف بهما نفسه تعالى وجاء قوله: {وَأَنَّ عَذَابِي} في غاية اللطف إذ لم يقل على وجه المقابلة وأنى المعذب المؤلم كل ذلك ترجيح لجهة العفو والرحمة.,"""And presenting these two great descriptions with which He described Himself, may He be exalted, and His saying: {And that My punishment} is in the utmost gentleness, for He did not say in a manner of retaliation, 'And I am the punisher, the painful.' All of that is a preference for forgiveness and mercy."""
7,{وَإِن كَانَ أَصْحَابُ ٱلأَيْكَةِ لَظَالِمِينَ} هم قوم شعيب والأيكة التي أضيفوا إليها كانت شجرة السدوم وقيل غير ذلك كفروا فسلط الله عليهم الحر وأهلكوا بعذاب الظلة ويأتي ذلك مستوفى في سورة الشعراء.,"""And indeed, the people of the Aika were unjust."" They are the people of Shu'ayb, and the Aika to which they were attributed was the tree of Sodom, and it was said otherwise. They disbelieved, so Allah sent upon them the heat and they were destroyed by the torment of the cloud. This will be fully explained in the chapter of Ash-Shu'ara."
