,original_sentence,translation
0,وقيل: إن كلامهم يتم عند قوله {يا ويلنا} ثم قال الله أو الملائكة {هذا يوم الدين} الجزاء والحساب {هذا يوم الفصل} القضاء والفرق بين المحسن والمسيء {احشروا الذين ظلموا} بالكفر أو بالفسق يعني رؤساءهم.,"It is said that their speech ends with his saying, ""Woe to us!"" Then Allah or the angels say, ""This is the Day of Judgment,"" the recompense and reckoning, ""This is the Day of Separation,"" the judgment and distinction between the good and the evil, ""Gather those who did wrong,"" by disbelief or wickedness, meaning their leaders."
1,{وَقَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا هَذَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ} أي: يوم يدين الله الناس فيه بأعمالهم.,"""and they said, 'Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment.'"""
2,قوله عز وجل: {وقالوا يا ويلنا هذا يومُ الدين} الآية.,"He said, exalted is He: {And they will say, ""Woe to us! This is the Day of Recompense.""}"
3,{وقالوا يا ويلنا هذا يوم الدين} يوم نُجازى فيه بما عملنا.,"They said, ""Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment,"" the day we will be recompensed for what we did."
4,ثم قال: {وَقَالُواْ يٰوَيْلَنَا هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلدِّينِ} أي: وقال هؤلاء المكذبون بالبعث لما عاينوا ما كانوا يوعدون: يا ويلنا هذا يوم الجزاء والحساب - وقد تقدم ذكر معنى الويل - ، فقالت لهم الملائكة: {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلْفَصْلِ ٱلَّذِي كُنتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ} أي: يوم القضاء بين الخلق.,"Then he said: {And they will say, ""Woe to us! This is the Day of Recompense.""} That is, those who deny the resurrection will say when they see what they were promised: ""Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment and Accountability"" - and the meaning of woe has been mentioned before - So the angels will say to them: {This is the Day of Judgment, which you used to deny.} That is, the Day of Judgment among the creation."
5,"وأجاز أبو حاتم أن نقف على \"" يا ويلنا \""، على أن يكون \"" هذا يوم الدين \"" وما بعده قول الملائكة لهم.","And Abu Hatim permitted us to stop at ""O woe to us,"" with ""This is the Day of Judgment"" and what follows being the words of the angels to them."
6,قوله تعالى {وقالوا يا ويلنا هذا يوم الدين هذا يوم الفصل الذي كنتم به تكذبون} معطوف على قوله {ينظرون} المشعر بأنهم مبهوتون مدهوشون متفكرون ثم يتنبهون بكونه يوم البعث فيه الدين والجزاء وهم يحذرون منه بما كفروا وكذبوا ولذا قالوا يوم الدين، ولم يقولوا يوم البعث، والتعبير بالماضي لتحقق الوقوع.,"""His saying, the Exalted, {And they will say, 'Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment. This is the Day of Separation, which you used to deny.'} is connected to His saying {they will look}, indicating that they are astonished, bewildered, and contemplative, then they will realize it is the Day of Resurrection, the Day of Judgment and recompense, which they used to deny and disbelieve. Therefore, they said the Day of Judgment, and did not say the Day of Resurrection. The expression in the past tense is to affirm its occurrence."""
7,قوله {وَقَالُواْ يٰوَيْلَنَا} أي قال أولئك المبعوثون لما عاينوا البعث الذي كانوا يكذبون به في الدنيا يا ويلنا، دعوا بالويل على أنفسهم.,"He said, ""Woe to us!"" That is, those who were resurrected said when they witnessed the resurrection which they used to deny in this world, ""Woe to us!"" They called for woe upon themselves."
8,قال النحاس ولو كان كما قال لكان منفصلاً، وهو في المصحف متصل، ولا نعلم أحداً يكتبه إلا متصلاً، وجملة {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلدّينِ} تعليل لدعائهم بالويل على أنفسهم، والدين الجزاء، فكأنهم قالوا هذا اليوم الذي نجازى فيه بأعمالنا من الكفر، والتكذيب للرسل، فأجاب عليهم الملائكة بقولهم {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلْفَصْلِ ٱلَّذِى كُنتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذّبُونَ}، ويجوز أن يكون هذا من قول بعضهم لبعض، والفصل الحكم، والقضاء لأنه يفصل فيه بين المحسن، والمسيء.,"Al-Nahhas said, ""If it were as he said, it would be separate, but in the Quran it is connected, and we do not know anyone who writes it except connected. The phrase {This is the Day of Judgment} is an explanation for their calling out misery upon themselves. Judgment is the recompense, as if they said, 'This is the day in which we are recompensed for our deeds of disbelief and denying the messengers.' The angels responded to them by saying, {This is the Day of Judgment which you used to deny}. It is also possible that this is said by some of them to others. Judgment is the ruling and the decree because it separates between the good and the evil."""
9,"ووقف أبو حاتم على \"" يَا وَيْلَنا \"" وجعل مع ما بعده من قوله الباري تعالى، وبعضهم جعل {هَذَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ} من كلام الكفار الكفرة فيقف عليه، وقوله: {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلْفَصْلِ} من قول الباري تعالى: وقيل: الجميع من كلامهم.","And Abu Hatim stood on ""O woe to us"" and made it with what follows from the saying of the Almighty, and some of them made ""This is the Day of Judgment"" from the speech of the disbelievers, so he stood on it, and his saying: ""This is the Day of Separation"" from the saying of the Almighty: And it was said: All of it is from their speech."
10,الحالة الثانية من تفاصيل أحوال القيامة قولهم بعد القيام من القبور: {يا ويلنا هذا يوم الدين} أي يوم الحساب ويوم الجزاء.,"The second state of the details of the Day of Judgment is their saying after rising from the graves: ""Woe to us, this is the Day of Recompense,"" that is, the Day of Account and the Day of Retribution."
11,"قال الزجاج: الويل كلمة يقولها القائل وقت الهَلَكَةِ، ويحتمل أن يكون المراد بقولهم: \"" هذا يوم الدين \"" أي يوم الحساب القيامة المذكور في قوله: {مَـٰلِكِ يَوْمِ ٱلدِّينِ} [الفاتحة: 4] أي لا مالك في ذلك اليوم إلا الله تعالى وأما قوله: {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلْفَصْلِ ٱلَّذِي كُنتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ} تَقَدَّم الكلام على قائله هل هو من كلام الله تعالى أو من كلام الملائكة أو من كلام المؤمنين أو من كلام الكفار.","Al-Zajjaj said: ""Woe"" is a word that the speaker says at the time of destruction. It is possible that what they mean by saying, ""This is the Day of Judgment"" is the Day of Resurrection mentioned in His saying: {Master of the Day of Judgment} [Al-Fatihah: 4], meaning that there is no master on that day except Allah, the Exalted. As for His saying: {This is the Day of Separation, which you used to deny}, the speech about its speaker has already been mentioned, whether it is from the speech of Allah, the Exalted, or from the speech of the angels, or from the speech of the believers, or from the speech of the disbelievers."
12,فإن قيل: ما معنى احشروا مع أنهم قد حشروا من قبل وحَضَروا مَحْفِل القيامة وقالوا: هذا يوم الدين وقالت الملائكة لهم: بل هذا يوم الفصل؟,"If it is said: What is the meaning of ""gather"" when they have already been gathered before and attended the assembly of the Resurrection and said: ""This is the Day of Judgment""? And the angels said to them: ""Nay, this is the Day of Decision""?"
13,{وَقَالُواْ يٰوَيْلَنَا هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلدِّينِ}، أي: يوم الحساب ويوم الجزاء.,"""and they said, 'Woe to us, this is the Day of Judgment,' that is, the Day of Reckoning and the Day of Retribution."""
14,{وَقَالُواْ يٰوَيْلَنَا هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلدّينِ} اليوم الذي نجازى بأعمالنا وقد تم به كلامهم وقوله: {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلْفَصْلِ ٱلَّذِى كُنتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذّبُونَ} جواب الملائكة، وقيل هو أيضاً من كلام بعضهم لبعض والفصل القضاء، أو الفرق بين المحسن والمسيء.,"""And they said, 'Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment,' the day on which we are recompensed for our deeds. And their speech ended with: 'This is the Day of Judgment, which you used to deny.' This is the response of the angels, and it has also been said that it is also the speech of some of them to others. And the Day of Judgment is the Day of Decision, or the distinction between the good and the evil."""
15,لما اخبر الله تعالى عن الكفار انهم إذا حشروا وشاهدوا القيامة وقالوا {يا ويلنا هذا يوم الدين} يعني الجزاء حكى ما يقول الله لهم فانه تعالى يقول لهم {هذا يوم الفصل} بين الخلائق والحكم وتميز الحق من الباطل على وجه يظهر لجميعهم الحال فيه.,"When Allah, the Exalted, informs about the disbelievers that when they are gathered and witness the Resurrection, they will say, ""Woe to us, this is the Day of Judgment,"" meaning the recompense, He relates what Allah will say to them. Indeed, He, the Exalted, will say to them, ""This is the Day of Judgment"" between the creatures, the ruling, and the distinction of truth from falsehood in a manner that makes the situation clear to all of them."
16,والأمر من الله - تعالى - للملائكة فى هذا اليوم الشديد، وهو يوم القيامة.,"And the command from Allah - the Exalted - to the angels on this severe day, which is the Day of Resurrection."
17,وقوله: {وَقَالُواْ يٰوَيْلَنَا هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلدِّينِ}.,"And they said, ""Woe to us! This is the Day of Reckoning."""
18,وقوله: {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلدِّينِ} أي: يوم الحساب ويوم الجزاء، وكذلك قوله: {مَـٰلِكِ يَوْمِ ٱلدِّينِ} [الفاتحة: 4].,"His saying: ""This is the Day of Judgment,"" meaning the Day of Reckoning and the Day of Recompense, and similarly His saying: ""Master of the Day of Judgment"" [Al-Fatihah: 4]."
19,ويحتمل: هذا يوم الذي ينفع كل من معه الدين دينه، والدين المطلق هو دين الله، وكذلك السبيل المطلق هو سبيل الله، أي: هذا يوم الدين الذي ينفع من كان معه دين الله، وكذا السبيل المطلق هو سبيل الله.,"It is possible: This is the Day when every soul will be recompensed for what it earned; and no injustice will be done to them. That Day is the Day of Judgment: whoever has faith in Allah and does righteous deeds - He will remove from him his misdeeds, and admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide therein forever: that is the supreme triumph."
20,وقال قتادة وغيره: {هَـٰذَا يَوْمُ ٱلدِّينِ}، أي: يدان لبعض الناس من بعض في المظالم والحقوق.,"And Qatadah and others said: ""This is the Day of Judgment,"" meaning: some people will judge others regarding injustices and rights."
21,{(20) وَقَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا هذَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ} يوم الحساب والمجازاة.,"""(20) And they will say, 'Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment.' The Day of Reckoning and Retribution."""
22,قال ابن الأنباري: وإِنما قال: {إِلى يوم الدِّين} لأنه يوم له أول وليس له آخر، فجرى مجرى الأبد الذي لا يفنى، والمعنى: عليك اللعنة أبداً.,"Said Ibn al-Anbari: And he said: ""Until the Day of Judgment"" because it is a day that has a beginning and no end, so it runs the course of eternity that does not perish, and the meaning is: ""Upon you be the curse forever."""
