,original_sentence,translation
0,{وَمَا تُجْزَوْنَ إِلاَّ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ} أي: ثواب عملكم في الدنيا.,"""And you will not be recompensed except for what you used to do."" That is, the reward for your deeds in this world."
1,وأقوام هم أرباب الزلات يختصهم الله برحمته فلا يفضحهم.,"And there are people who are masters of mistakes, whom Allah singles out with His mercy and does not expose them."
2,قوله تعالى {وما تجزون إلا ما كنتم تعملون} أي لا ظلم فيه لأنه نفس عملكم يرد إليكم.,"""His saying, the Exalted, {And you will only be recompensed for what you used to do} means: there is no injustice in it, because it is your own deeds that are returned to you."""
3,الإشارة: ويقال على طريق العكس: احْشُروا الذين أحسنوا واتقوا ربهم، وأزواجهم، ومَن انتسب إليهم، فاهدوهم إلى طريق الجنان، وقِفوهم يشفعوا فيمن تعلّق بهم، إنهم مسؤولون عن أصحابهم وعشائرهم، حتى يخلصوهم من ورطة الحساب.,"The sign: It is said in the opposite way: ""Gather those who did good and feared their Lord, and their spouses, and those who are related to them, and guide them to the path of Paradise, and stop them so that they may intercede for those who are connected to them. They are responsible for their companions and clans, until they save them from the predicament of the reckoning."""
4,أراد بأزواجهم قرناءَهم وأشكالهم ومَنْ عمل مثل أعمالهم، ومن أعانهم على ظلمهم بقليل أو كثير … وكذلك في هذه الطريقة: من أعان صاحبَ فترة في فترته، أو صاحب زَلة على زلته - كان مُشاركاً له في عقوبته، واستحقاق طرده وإهانته.,"He intended for their spouses, their counterparts, and those who did like their deeds, and those who aided them in their oppression, little or much... And similarly, in this manner: whoever aids a person in his period of trial, or aids a person in his slip - he is a participant in his punishment, and deserves to be expelled and humiliated."
5,وما جزاؤه؟,What is his reward?
6,{وَمَا تُجْزَوْنَ إِلاَّ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ} أى وما نجازيكم بهذا الجزاء الموجع المؤلم.,"""And you will not be recompensed except for what you used to do."" That is, ""We will not punish you with this painful punishment."""
