,original_sentence,translation
0,المنَاسَبَة: لما ذكر قصة الخليل إبراهيم، وقصة الذبيح والفداء، أعقبها بذكر قصص بعض الأنبياء، كموسى وهارون، ويونس ولوط، وما في هذه القصة من العظات والعبر، وختم السورة الكريمة ببيان أن النصر والغلبة للرسل وأتباعهم المؤمنين.,"The occasion: When he mentioned the story of the friend of God, Abraham, and the story of the sacrifice and redemption, he followed it with the mention of the stories of some prophets, such as Moses and Aaron, Jonah and Lot, and the lessons and morals in these stories. He concluded the noble surah by stating that victory and triumph belong to the prophets and their believing followers."
1,{أَلاَ إِنَّهُم مِّنْ إِفْكِهِمْ لَيَقُولُونَ * وَلَدَ ٱللَّهُ} أي ألا فانتبهوا أيها الناس إن هؤلاء المشركين من كذبهم وافترائهم ينسبون إلى الله الذرية والولد {وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ} أي وهم كاذبون قطعاً في قولهم الملائكة بناتُ الله قال أبو السعود: والآية استئناف مسوقٌ لإِبطال أصل مذهبهم الفاسد، ببيان أن مبناه ليس إلا الإِفك الصريح، والافتراء القبيح، من غير أن يكون لهم دليلٌ قطعاً {أَصْطَفَى ٱلْبَنَاتِ عَلَىٰ ٱلْبَنِينَ}؟,"""Indeed, they say, out of their falsehood, 'Allah has begotten,' but they are indeed liars. Do they attribute to Allah daughters and sons? Have they chosen daughters over sons?"""
2,فنزلت الآية ثم قال تعالى {فَإِذَا نَزَلَ بِسَاحَتِهِمْ فَسَآءَ صَبَاحُ ٱلْمُنْذَرِينَ} أي لا يستبعدوا ذلك فإِن العذاب إِذا نزل بفناء المكذبين فبئس هذا الصباح صباحهم، شبهه بجيشٍ هجم عليهم وقت الصباح فقطع دابرهم {وَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ * وَأَبْصِرْ فَسَوْفَ يُبْصِرُونَ} كرره تأكيداً للتهديد وتسلية للرسول صلى الله عليه وسلم {سُبْحَانَ رَبِّكَ رَبِّ ٱلْعِزَّةِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ} أي تنزه وتقدس ذو العزة والجبروت عما يصفه به المشركون {وَسَلاَمٌ عَلَىٰ ٱلْمُرْسَلِينَ * وَٱلْحَمْدُ للَّهِ رَبِّ ٱلْعَالَمِينَ} أي وسلامٌ منا على الرسل الكرام، والحمد لله في البد والختام لله ربّ الخلائق أجمعين.,"So the verse was revealed, then He, the Most High, said: ""But when it descends upon their courtyard, then evil is the morning of those warned."" That is, they should not consider it far-fetched, for when the punishment descends upon the courtyard of the deniers, then evil is their morning. It is likened to an army that attacked them at dawn and cut off their roots. ""And turn away from them for a while, and see, for they will see."" He repeated it to emphasize the threat and to console the Messenger, may the blessings and peace be upon him. ""Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honor, of what they describe."" That is, the Possessor of Honor and Majesty is exalted and sanctified from what the polytheists describe Him as. ""And peace be upon the messengers, and praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds."" That is, peace be upon us to the honorable messengers, and praise be to Allah in the beginning and the end, to Allah, Lord of all creatures."
3,نزَّه تعالى نفسه عما وصفه به الكفار مما لا يليق به سبحانه، فإِنه حكى عنهم في هذه السورة أقوالاً كثيرة شنيعة، وختم بتعميم السلام على الرسل الكرام وبحمده سبحانه، وهو تعليم للعباد.,"He, the Exalted, has purified Himself from what the disbelievers have attributed to Him, which is not befitting of His Majesty. For He has narrated from them in this Surah many reprehensible statements, and He concluded with a general greeting of peace to the noble messengers and with His praise, the Exalted. And this is an instruction for the servants."
4,"ثم سلاه بوقائع الأمم الخالية تفصيلاً, وقدّم قصة نوح عليه السلام لكونه أباً ثانياً ونداؤه في قوله {رب انصرني بما كذبون} [المؤمنون: 26] أو قوله {رب لا تذر على الأرض من الكافرين دياراً} [نوح: 26] واللام الداخلة على {نعم} جواب قسم محذوف أو للابتداء، والمخصوص بالمدح وهو نحن محذوف، والجمع لتصوير العظمة والكبرياء، وفيه وفي فاء التعقيب في {فلنعم} دليل على أن نداء العظيم الكبير حقيق بأن يكون مقروناً بإجابة.","Then he mentioned the events of the past nations in detail, and he presented the story of Noah, peace be upon him, as he was a second father, and his call in his saying, ""My Lord, help me against them for they call me a liar!"" [Al-Mu'minun: 26] or his saying, ""My Lord, leave not on the earth a single dweller of the unbelievers!"" [Nuh: 26] And the lam (preposition) entering upon ""Indeed"" is for an omitted oath or for the beginning, and the one being praised, which is ""we,"" is omitted, and the plural is for depicting greatness and majesty, and in it and in the fā' (letter) of immediate consequence in ""Indeed, how excellent"" is evidence that the call of the Great and Mighty is worthy to be accompanied by an answer."
5,فسام أبو العرب وفارس والروم، وحام أبو السودان شرقاً وغرباً، ويافث أبو الترك والخزر ويأجوج ومأجوج وتركنا عليه في المتأخرين من الأمم هذه الكلمة وهي {سلام على نوح} ومعنى {في العالمين} أن هذه التحية ثبتها الله فيهم فيسلم الثقلان عليه إلى يوم القيامة.,"""Sam, the father of the Arabs, the Persians, and the Romans, and Ham, the father of the Sudanese, both east and west, and Japheth, the father of the Turks, the Khazars, Gog, and Magog. And we left this word with the later nations: 'Peace be upon Noah.' And the meaning of 'in the worlds' is that this greeting was established by Allah among them, so the two heavy ones (jinn and humans) will greet him until the Day of Resurrection."""
6,وحين تمم ما آل إليه أمر نوح وذريته ذكر عاقبة سائر قومه فقال {ثم أغرقنا الآخرين} أعاذنا الله من الإغراق والإِحراق وجعل فلكنا فلك نوح وسفرنا متضمناً للنصر والفتوح.,"When the matter of Noah and his descendants reached its end, he mentioned the fate of the rest of his people and said, ""Then We drowned the others."" May God protect us from drowning and burning, and may our journey be like Noah's ark, filled with victory and conquests."
7,"{لمثل هذا فليعمل العاملون} بل لمثل هذه الأمور تبذل الأرواح وتفدى الأشباح كما قيل: (شعر) على مثل ليلى يقتل المرء نفسه وإن بات من ليلى على اليأس والصدّ ثم أخبر بعد قصة الأولياء عن قصة الأعداء بقوله {أذلك خير نزلاً أم شجرة الزقوم} وفي قوله {كأنه رؤوس الشياطين} دليل على أن أفعالهم كانت في قبح صفات الشياطين فكانت مكافأتهم من جنس صورة الشياطين {سلام على نوح في العالمين} أنه تعالى سلم على نوح الروح لأنه يحتاج إلى سلام الله ليعبر على الصراط المستقيم الذي هو أدقَ من الشعر وأحدّ من السيف، ولهذا يكون دعوة الرسل حينئذ رب \"" سلم سلم \"".","""For such a thing, let the workers work."" Rather, for such matters, souls are sacrificed and lives are given. As it was said: (poetry) ""For the sake of one like Layla, a man sacrifices his soul, even if he is desperate and rejected by Layla."" Then, after mentioning the story of the friends, he mentioned the story of the enemies by saying, ""Is that a better abode, or the tree of Zaqqum?"" And in His saying, ""As if they were the heads of devils,"" there is evidence that their actions were as ugly as the qualities of devils, so their recompense was of the kind of the form of devils. ""Peace be upon Noah among the worlds."" He, the Exalted, sent peace upon Noah the spirit because he needs the peace of Allah to cross the straight path, which is thinner than hair and sharper than a sword. And for this reason, the invocation of the messengers at that time is, ""O Lord, grant peace, grant peace."""
8,{وَنَزَعْنَا مَا فِي صُدُورِهِم} تقدم شرحه في الاعراف وانتصب إخواناً على الحال وهي حال من الضمير المجرور في صدورهم والحال من المضاف نادرة وقد تأول نصبه على غير الحال من الضمير المجرور.,"""And We removed what was in their breasts"""
9,والطائعين من الجنة ذكر العرب بأحوال من يعرفونه ممن عصى وكذب الرسل فحل به عذاب الدنيا قبل عذاب الآخرة ليزدجروا عن كفرهم وليعتبروا بما حل بغيرهم فبدأ بذكر جدّهم الأعلى إبراهيم صلى الله عليه وسلم وما جرى بقوم ابن أخيه لوط عليه السلام ثم بذكر أصحاب الحجر وهم قوم صالح، ثم بأصحاب الأيكة وهم قوم شعيب، وضيف إبراهيم هم الملائكة الذين بشروه بالولد وبهلاك قوم لوط وتقدّم الكلام عليه في سورة هود ونبئهم عدي نبئهم بحرف الجر وهو عن ولم يذكر لها مفعولاً ولا مفعولين وسلاماً مقتطع من جملة محكية بقالوا فليس منصوباً به والتقدير سلمت سلاماً من السلامة أو سلمنا سلاما من التحية وقيل سلاماً نعت لمصدر محذوف تقديره فقالوا قولاً سلاماً وتصريحه هنا بأنه وجل منهم كان بعد تقريبه إليهم ما أضافهم به وهو العجل الحنيذ وامتناعهم من الأكل وفي هود فأوجس في نفسه خيفة فيمكن أن هذا التصريح كان بعد إيجاس الخيفة ويحتمل أن يكون القول هنا مجازاً بأنه ظهرت عليه مخايل الخوف حتى صار كالمصرح به القائل.,"And the obedient ones from Paradise, the Arabs are reminded of the conditions of those they know who disobeyed and denied the messengers, so the torment of this world befell them before the torment of the Hereafter, so that they may be deterred from their disbelief and may take heed of what befell others. He began by mentioning their highest ancestor, Abraham, peace be upon him, and what happened to the people of his nephew Lot, peace be upon him, then by mentioning the companions of Al-Hijr, who are the people of Salih, then by mentioning the companions of Al-Aikah, who are the people of Shu'ayb. The guests of Abraham were the angels who gave him the good news of a child and the destruction of the people of Lot. This has been mentioned earlier in the chapter of Hud. And they were informed with the preposition ""about"" and not with two objects. And ""peace"" is cut off from a quoted sentence with ""they said,"" so it is not in the accusative case because of it. The estimation is, ""I send peace, a peace of safety,"" or ""We send peace, a peace of greeting."" And it has been said, ""peace"" is an attribute of a deleted source, its estimation being, ""they said a saying, peace."" And his explicit statement here that he was afraid of them was after he offered them what he had added to them, which was the roasted calf, and their refusal to eat. And in Hud, ""he felt fear in himself,"" so it is possible that this explicit statement was after feeling fear. And it is possible that the saying here is a metaphor that the signs of fear appeared on him until he became like the one who explicitly said it."
10,{قَالَ فَمَا خَطْبُكُمْ} الآية، لما بشروه بالولد وراجعوه في ذلك علم أنهم ملائكة الله ورسله فاستفهم بقوله: فما خطبكم والخطب لا يكاد يقال إلا في الأمر الشديد فإضافة إليهم من حيث أنهم هم حاملوه إلى أولئك القوم المعذبين وذكر إلى قوم مجرمين فأبرزه في صورة النكرة وان كان أريد به معيّنون يدل على ذلك قولهم في سورة هود: {إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِ لُوطٍ} [الآية: 70] فعينهم، وإنما نكر هاهنا على سبيل الاستهانة بهم وإن كانوا معينين من جهة المعنى فقوله: إلا آل لوط، استثناء نكرة في الظاهر ولكنهم معينون في المعنى وكثيراً ما تأتي النكرة يراد بها التعين كقول من صحب رجلاً عالماً معيناً فيقول: لقد صحبت رجلاً عالماً.,"He said, ""What is your affair?"" When they gave him the good news of a child and he discussed it with them, he knew that they were angels and messengers of Allah. So he asked, ""What is your affair?"" And the affair is hardly said except in a severe matter. Their addition to them is from the fact that they are the ones who carry it to those tormented people. And he mentioned to a people of criminals, and he brought it in the form of an indefinite noun, although it was meant to be specific. This is indicated by their saying in Surat Hud: ""Indeed, We have been sent to the people of Lot"" [verse: 70]. So they specified them. And here it is made indefinite in a manner of belittling them, even though they are specific in meaning. So his saying, ""except the family of Lot,"" is an exception of an indefinite noun in appearance, but they are specific in meaning. And often the indefinite comes to mean specificity, such as the saying of someone who accompanied a specific scholar, ""I have accompanied a scholar."""
11,"{إِلاَّ ٱمْرَأَتَهُ} استثناء من الضمير المنصوب في منجوهم قال الزمخشري: فإِن قلت فقوله: إلا امرأته، مما استثنى وهل هو استثناء من استثناء * قلت: استثنى من الضمير المجرور في قوله لمنجوهم وليس من الاستثناء من الاستثناء في شىء لأن الاستثناء من الاستثناء إنما يكون فيما اتحد الحكم فيه وان يقال أهلكناهم إلا آل لوط، إلا امرأته، كما اتحد الحكم في قول المطلق ثلاثاً إلا اثنتين إلا واحدة، وفي قول المقر لفلان على عشرة دراهم إلا ثلاثة إلا درهم فاما في الآية فقد اختلف الحكمان لأن آل لوط متعلق بأرسلنا أو بمجرمين ولا امرأته قد تعلق بمنجوهم فأنى يكون استثناء من استثناء \"" انتهى \"".","""Except his wife"" is an exception from the accusative pronoun in ""those who will be saved."" Al-Zamakhshari said: If you say, ""Except his wife,"" is it an exception? Is it an exception from an exception? I say: It is an exception from the genitive pronoun in ""those who will be saved,"" and it is not an exception from an exception at all, because an exception from an exception is only in what is united in its ruling, such as saying, ""I divorced three times, except two, except one,"" or in the case of someone who says, ""I owe ten dirhams to so-and-so, except three, except one."" As for the verse, the ruling is different, because ""the family of Lot"" is related to ""We sent"" or ""criminals,"" and ""except his wife"" is related to ""those who will be saved."" So how can it be an exception from an exception?"
12,لما استسلف الزمخشري ان إلا امرأته مستثنى من الضمير المجرور لم يجوز أن يكون استثناء من استثناء ومن قال انه استثناء من استثناء فيمكن تصحيح كلامه بأحد وجهين أحدهما: أنه كان الضمير في لمنجوهم عائداً على آل لوط وقد استثنى منه المرأة فصار كأنه مستثنى من آل لوط لأن المضمر هو الظاهر في المعنى والوجه الآخر أن قوله إلا آل لوط لما حكم عليهم بغير الحكم على قوم مجرمين اقتضى ذلك نجاتهم في قوله: إنا لمنجوهم أجمعين تأكيد المعنى الاستثناء إذ المعنى إلا آل لوط فلم يرسل عليهم بالعذاب ونجاتهم مترتبة على عدم الإِرسال إليهم بالعذاب فصار نظير قولك قام القوم إلا زيداً فإِنه لم يقم أو إلا زيداً لم يقم فهذه الجملة تأكيد لما تضمنه الاستثناء من الحكم على ما بعد إلا بضد الحكم السابق على المستثنى منه فالأمر أنه على هذا التقرير الذي قررناه استثناء من آل لوط لأن الاستثناء مما جيء به للتأسيس أولى من الاستثناء مما جيء للتأكيد وجاء الضمير في أرسلنا وفي أنا وفي قدرنا مسند إلى الملائكة لأنهم هم المأمورون بإِهلاكهم ووصف قوم بمنكرون لأنه نكرتهم نفسه ونفرت منهم وخاف أن يطرقوه بشر وبل إضراب عن قول محذوف أي ما جئناك لشىء تخافه بل جئنا بالعذاب لقومك إذ كانوا يمترون فيه أي يشكون في وقوعه فيجادلونك فيه تكذيباً لك بما وعدتهم به عن الله تعالى.,"When Al-Zamakhshari borrowed the idea that only his wife is excluded from the pronoun in the accusative case, he did not allow it to be an exception from an exception. And whoever says that it is an exception from an exception, his statement can be corrected in one of two ways: One of them is that the pronoun in ""for their deliverance"" refers to the family of Lot, and his wife was excluded from it, so it became as if it were excluded from the family of Lot, because the implied is the apparent in meaning. The other way is that when the statement ""except the family of Lot"" was ruled with a different ruling than the ruling on the criminal people, this necessitated their deliverance in the statement: ""Indeed, we are their deliverers all of them,"" confirming the meaning of the exception, because the meaning is ""except the family of Lot,"" so they were not sent upon with punishment, and their deliverance is consequent upon not sending punishment to them. So it is similar to saying, ""The people stood up except Zayd, for he did not stand up,"" or ""except Zayd, he did not stand up."" This sentence is a confirmation of what the exception included of the ruling on what comes after ""except"" with the opposite of the previous ruling on the excluded. So, on this explanation that we have explained, it is an exception from the family of Lot, because the exception that is brought for establishment is more appropriate than the exception that is brought for confirmation. The pronoun in ""We sent"" and in ""We"" and in ""We have decreed"" is attributed to the angels, because they are the ones ordered to destroy them. And the description of the people as ""unknown"" is because he did not recognize them, was frightened of them, and feared that they would approach him with evil. Rather, it is a negation of a deleted statement, meaning, ""We did not come to you for something you fear, but we came with punishment for your people because they doubted its occurrence, so they argued with you in disbelief of what you promised them from Allah, the Exalted."""
13,قال ابن عباس: هي الشام ولما ضمن قضينا معنى أوحينا تعدت تعديها بإِلى أي وأوحينا إلى لوط مقضياً مبتوتاً والإِشارة بذلك إلى ما وعده تعالى من إهلاك قومه وان دابر تفخيم للأمر وتعظيم له وهو في موضع نصب على البدل من ذلك.,"Ibn Abbas said: ""It is Sham (Syria). When 'we have decreed' includes the meaning of 'we have revealed,' it is transitive with 'to,' meaning 'and we revealed to Lot a decisive matter.' The reference to that is what Allah promised of the destruction of his people. 'And the root' is an exaggeration of the matter and an amplification of it, and it is in the position of an accusative object as a substitute for that."""
14,"{وَجَآءَ أَهْلُ ٱلْمَدِينَةِ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ} الآية استبشارهم فرحهم بالأضياف الذين وردوا على لوط صلى الله عليه وسلم والظاهر ان هذا المجيء ومجاورة لوط مع قومه في حق أضيافه وعرضه بناته عليهم كان ذلك كله قبل إعلامه بهلاك قومه وعلمه بأنهم رسل الله ولذلك سماهم ضيفاً وخاف الفضيحة منهم لأجل تعاطيهم ما لا يجوز من الفعل القبيح وقد جاء ذلك مرتباً هكذا في سورة \"" هود \"" والواو لا ترتب ولا تخزون من الخزي وهو الإِذلال أو من الخازية وهو الاستحياء وفي قولهم: {أَوَ لَمْ نَنْهَكَ} دليل على تقدم نهيهم إياه عن أن يضيف أو يجير أحداً أو يدفع عنه أو يمنع بينهم وبينه فإِنهم كانوا يتعرضون لكل أحد وكان هو عليه السلام يقوم بالنهي عن المنكر والحجز بينه وبين من تعرض له فأوعدوه بأنه لم ينته خرجوه وتقدم الكلام في قوله تعالى: {بَنَاتِي} ومعنى الإِضافة في هود وإن كنتم فاعلين شك قبولهم لقوله كأنه قال: ان فعلتم ما أقول لكم وما أظنكم تفعلون، وقيل: ان كنتم تريدون قضاء الشهوة فيما أحل الله دون ما حرم.","""And the people of the city came rejoicing. Their rejoicing was their joy at the guests who had come to Lot, peace be upon him. It appears that this coming and Lot's neighborhood with his people regarding his guests and his offering his daughters to them was all before he was informed of the destruction of his people and his knowledge that they were messengers of God. And that is why he called them guests and feared disgrace from them due to their committing what is not permissible of the ugly deed. And this has come arranged thus in the surah of 'Hud.' And the 'waw' does not arrange. And 'do not humiliate' is from humiliation or from shame. And in their saying: 'Have we not forbidden you?' there is evidence of their previous forbidding him from hosting or protecting anyone or defending him or preventing them from him. For they used to harass everyone, and he, peace be upon him, used to forbid evil and intervene between him and whoever harassed him. So they threatened him that if he did not stop, they would expel him. And the speech has preceded in His saying, the Exalted: 'My daughters.' And the meaning of the addition in 'Hud' is if you are going to do it, doubt of their acceptance of his saying, as if he said: if you do what I say to you, and I do not think you will do it. And it has been said: if you want to satisfy your desire in what God has made lawful, not what He has forbidden."""
15,واللام في لعمرك لام الابتداء وعمرك مبتدأ خبره محذوف تقديره لعمرك قسمي وإذا كان في القسم كانت العين مفتوحة ومعناها البقاء وجواب القسم فقيل القسم من الملائكة خطاباً للوط صلى الله عليه وسلم وقيل خطابا لرسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم وكني عن الضلالة والغفلة بالسكر أي تحيرهم في غفلتهم وضلالتهم منعهم عن إدراك الصواب الذي يشير به والصيحة صيحة الهلاك ومشرقين داخلين في الشروق وهو بزوغ الشمس وقيل أول العذاب كان عند الصبح وامتد إلى شروق الشمس فكان تمام الهلاك عند ذلك والضمير في عاليها سافلها عائد على المدينة المتقدمة الذكر.,"And the lam in ""la'umrika"" is the lam of initiation, and ""umrika"" is a subject with an omitted predicate, estimated as ""la'umrika qasami"" (by your life, my oath). And if it is in an oath, then the 'ayn is open, and its meaning is survival. And the response to the oath, it was said that the oath is from the angels, speaking to Lot, peace be upon him, and it was said that it is speaking to the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him. And the metaphor for misguidance and heedlessness is intoxication, meaning their confusion in their heedlessness and misguidance prevented them from perceiving the truth that he pointed to. And the cry is the cry of destruction, and ""mushriqeen"" means entering into the morning, which is the rising of the sun, and it was said that the beginning of the punishment was at dawn and extended to sunrise, so complete destruction was at that time. And the pronoun in ""aliha safilaha"" refers back to the city previously mentioned."
16,{إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ} أي في صنعنا بقوم لوط لعلامة ودليلاً لمن آمن بالله تعالى.,"""Indeed, in that"" - meaning in Our dealing with the people of Lot - ""there is a sign and a proof for those who believe in Allah, the Most High."""
