,original_sentence,translation
0,"فَائِدَة: روى ابن أبي حاتم عن الشعبي قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: \"" من سرَّه أن يكتال بالمكيال الأوفى فليقل آخر مجلسه حين يريد أن يقوم {سُبْحَانَ رَبِّكَ رَبِّ ٱلْعِزَّةِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ * وَسَلاَمٌ عَلَىٰ ٱلْمُرْسَلِينَ * وَٱلْحَمْدُ للَّهِ رَبِّ ٱلْعَالَمِينَ} \"".","Benefit: Ibn Abi Hatim narrated from Ash-Sha'bi that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said: ""Whoever is pleased to be given the full measure, let him say at the end of his gathering, when he wants to leave: 'Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honor, from what they describe. And peace be upon the messengers. And praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds.'"""
1,والإرداء الإِهلاك، وبخه على أنه كان يدعوه في الدنيا إلى إنكار البعث المتضمن للكفر المؤدّي إلى الهلاك الحقيقي.,"""And the destruction, he rebuked him for denying the resurrection in this world, which involves disbelief leading to true destruction."""
2,{إِنَّ إِلَـٰهَكُمْ لَوَاحِدٌ} موضع القسم قال مقاتل: لأنّ كفار مكة قالوا: أجعل الآلهة إلهاً واحداً؟,"""Indeed, your God is One."" The place of the oath. Muqatil said: Because the disbelievers of Mecca said, ""Has he made the gods one God?"""
3,فأقسم الله تعالى بهؤلاء: {إِنَّ إِلَـٰهَكُمْ لَوَاحِدٌ}، وقرأ الأعمش وأبو عمرو وحمزة كلّهم بالإدغام، والباقون بالبيان.,"So Allah, the Most High, swore by these: {Indeed, your God is One}, and Al-A'mash, Abu Amr, and Hamzah all read it with assimilation, while the rest read it clearly."
4,قال عمر بن الخطاب: احضروا موتاكم ولقنوهم: لا إله إلا الله، فإنهم يرون ويسمعون.,"Omar ibn al-Khattab said: ""Bring your dying to you and teach them: 'There is no god but Allah,' for they see and hear."""
5,ثم قال (تعالى): {وَيَقُولُونَ أَئِنَّا لَتَارِكُوۤاْ آلِهَتِنَا لِشَاعِرٍ مَّجْنُونٍ} أي: وكانوا في الدنيا - يعني المشركين - (يقولون): أنترك عبادة الأصنام والأوثان، لما يأمر به شاعر مجنون من أن نقول: لا إله إلا الله، يعنون بذلك محمداً صلى الله عليه وسلم.,"Then He (the Exalted) said: ""{And they say, 'Shall we leave our gods for the sake of a mad poet?'""} That is, in this world - meaning the polytheists - (they used to say): ""Shall we abandon the worship of idols and statues, for what a mad poet commands us to say: 'There is no god but Allah'?"" They meant by that Muhammad, peace be upon him."
6,قال الله جلَّ ذكره: {بَلْ جَآءَ بِٱلْحَقِّ وَصَدَّقَ ٱلْمُرْسَلِينَ} أي: بل جاء محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم بالحق ولم يأت بشعر، وصَدَّقَ بما جاء به المرسلون، أي: كتبهم، لأن في كتب المرسلين قبله أنه سيبعث بكتاب من عند الله، وفي ما جاء به محمد ذكر المرسلين وتصديقهم بما أتوا به من الكتب.,"God, the Exalted in His Remembrance, said: {But he has come with the truth and confirmed the messengers} meaning: But Muhammad, may God bless him and grant him peace, came with the truth and did not come with poetry, and he confirmed what the messengers brought, meaning their books, because in the books of the messengers before him it was mentioned that a book would be sent from God, and in what Muhammad brought there is mention of the messengers and confirmation of the books they brought."
7,ثم أخبر عنهم بأكبر إجرامهم، وهو الشرك بالله، واستكبارهم عن توحيده، وإفراده بالآلهية.,"Then he informed them of their greatest crime, which is polytheism towards God, their arrogance towards His oneness, and their refusal to single Him out as the deity."
8,وقولهم: {لشاعر مجنون}: تخليط في كلامهم، وارتباك في غيهم.,"And their saying: ""A poet, a madman"": confusion in their speech, and chaos in their error."
9,فإن الشاعر هو عنده من الفهم والحذق وجودة الإدراك ما ينظم به المعاني الغريبة ويصوغها في قالب الألفاظ البديعة، ومن كان مجنوناً لا يصل إلى شيء من ذلك.,"The poet possesses understanding, skill, and keen perception, which enable him to organize strange meanings and cast them in the mold of exquisite words. But the madman cannot attain any of that."
10,ثم أضرب تعالى عن كلامهم، وأخبر بأن جاء الحق، وهو إثبات الذي لا يلحقه إضمحلال، فليس ما جاء به شعراً، بل هو الحق الذي لا شك فيه.,"Then He, the Exalted, turned away from their speech, and informed that the truth has come, which is the establishment of that which does not diminish, so what has come is not poetry, but rather it is the truth in which there is no doubt."
11,ثم أخبر أنه صدق من تقدمه من المرسلين، إذ هو وهم على طريقة واحدة في دعوى الأمم إلى التوحيد وترك عبادة غيره.,"Then he informed that he was truthful in what he was sent with, as he and those before him of the messengers were on one way in calling the nations to monotheism and leaving the worship of others."
12,بيان حكاية استهزائهم بآيات الله وبعض أقاويلهم المبنية على الكفر وإنكار المعاد والرد عليهم بتقرير أمر البعث وما يجري عليهم فيه من الشدة وألوان العذاب وما يكرم الله به عباده المخلصين من النعمة والكرامة.,"A statement of the story of their mockery of the verses of Allah and some of their sayings based on disbelief and denial of the Hereafter, and the response to them by establishing the matter of the Resurrection and what will happen to them in it of severity and various types of punishment, and what Allah honors His sincere servants with of blessings and dignity."
13,قوله تعالى {ويقولون ءإنا لتاركوا آلهتنا لشاعر مجنون بل جاء بالحق وصدق المرسلين} قولهم هذا إنكار منهم للرسالة بعد استكبارهم عن التوحيد وإنكارهم له.,"""His saying, the Exalted, {And they say, 'Shall we leave our gods for a poet madman? Rather, he has brought the truth and confirmed the messengers.'} Their saying this is a denial of the message after their arrogance towards monotheism and their denial of it."""
14,وقوله {بل جاء بالحق وصدق المرسلين} رد لقولهم {لشاعر مجنون} حيث رموه عليه السلام بالشعر والجنون وفيه رمي لكتاب الله بكونه شعراً ومن هفوات الجنون فرد عليهم بأن ما جاء به حق وفيه تصديق الرسل السابقين فليس بباطل من القول كالشعر وهفوة الجنون وليس ببدع غير مسبوق في معناه.,"His saying, ""Nay, he has brought the truth and confirmed the messengers,"" is a response to their saying, ""A poet, a madman,"" where they accused him, peace be upon him, of poetry and madness. This is also an accusation of the Book of Allah being poetry and the ravings of madness. So, He refuted them by saying that what he brought is the truth and confirms the previous messengers. It is not false speech like poetry or the ravings of madness, nor is it something unprecedented in its meaning."
15,وقوله {قال تالله إن كدت لتردين} {إن} مخففة من الثقيلة، والإِرداء السقوط من مكان عال كالشاهق ويكنى به عن الهلاك والمعنى أُقسم بالله إنك قربت أن تهلكني وتسقطني فيما سقطت فيه من الجحيم.,"His saying, ""By Allah, you were about to lead me astray,"" ""In"" is a lightened form of the heavy, and ""al-irda'"" means falling from a high place like a cliff, and it is a metaphor for destruction. The meaning is: ""I swear by Allah, you were about to destroy me and make me fall into what you fell into of Hellfire."""
16,وأخرج ابن أبي حاتم، وابن مردويه عنه في قوله {كَانُواْ إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لاَ إِلَـٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللَّهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ} قال كانوا إذا لم يشرك بالله يستنكفون، {وَيَقُولُونَ أَإِنَّا لَتَارِكُو ءالِهَتِنَا لِشَاعِرٍ مَّجْنُونٍ} لا يعقل، قال فحكى الله صدقه، فقال {بَلْ جَاء بِٱلْحَقّ وَصَدَّقَ ٱلْمُرْسَلِينَ}.,"""And Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Marduwayh narrated from him regarding the statement {They were the ones who, when it was said to them, 'There is no god except Allah,' were arrogant} he said: 'When they were not associating partners with Allah, they would be arrogant,' {And they would say, 'Shall we leave our gods for a poet who is mad?'} he said: 'He does not make sense,' so Allah narrated his truth, and said {But he has come with the truth and confirmed the messengers}."""
17,"وأخرج ابن جرير، وابن أبي حاتم، وابن مردويه، والبيهقي في الأسماء والصفات عن أبي هريرة قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم \"" أمرت أن أقاتل الناس حتى يقولوا لا إلٰه إلاّ الله، فمن قال لا إلٰه إلاّ الله، فقد عصم مني ماله، ونفسه إلا بحقه، وحسابه على الله \"" وأنزل الله في كتابه، وذكر قوماً استكبروا، فقال {إِنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لاَ إِلَـٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللَّهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ}، وقال {إِذْ جَعَلَ ٱلَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فِى قُلُوبِهِمُ ٱلْحَمِيَّةَ حَمِيَّةَ ٱلْجَـٰهِلِيَّةِ فَأَنزَلَ ٱللَّهُ سَكِينَتَهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ وَعَلَى ٱلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَأَلْزَمَهُمْ كَلِمَةَ ٱلتَّقْوَىٰ وَكَانُوۤاْ أَحَقَّ بِهَا وَأَهْلَهَا} الفتح 26 وهي لا إلٰه إلاّ الله محمد رسول الله، استكبر عنها المشركون يوم الحديبية يوم كاتبهم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم على قضية الهدنة.","And Ibn Jarir, Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Marduwayh, and Al-Bayhaqi in Al-Asma' wa Al-Sifat narrated from Abu Hurairah that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said, ""I have been commanded to fight the people until they say, 'There is no god but Allah.' Whoever says, 'There is no god but Allah,' has protected from me his property and his life, except for his due rights, and his reckoning is with Allah."" And Allah revealed in His Book, mentioning a people who were arrogant, and said, {Indeed, they were, when it was said to them, ""There is no deity except Allah,"" they were arrogant} [Surat Al-Saff: 6]. And He said, {When those who disbelieved had put into their hearts arrogance - the arrogance of [ancient] ignorance - then Allah sent down His tranquility upon His Messenger and upon the believers and obliged them to [maintain] the word of righteousness, and they were more worthy of it and deserving of it} [Surat Al-Fath: 26]. And it is, ""There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah."" The polytheists were arrogant about it on the day of Al-Hudaybiyyah, the day when the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) wrote to them the treaty of the truce."
18,{إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوۤاْ إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لاَ إِلَـٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللَّهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ} أي إذا قيل لهم قولوا فأضمر القول.,"""Indeed, they were, when it was said to them, 'There is no god except Allah,' they were arrogant."""
19,"ولما قال النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم لأبي طالب عند موته وٱجتماع قريش: \"" قولوا لا إله إلا الله تملكوا بها العرب وتدين لكم بها العجم \"" أبَوْا وأنِفُوا من ذلك.","When the Prophet, peace be upon him, said to Abu Talib at the time of his death and the gathering of Quraysh: ""Say, 'There is no god but Allah,' and you will possess the Arabs and the non-Arabs will submit to you,"" they refused and were averse to it."
20,"وقال أبو هريرة عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم قال: \"" أنزل الله تعالى في كتابه فذكر قوماً ٱستكبروا فقال: {إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوۤاْ إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لاَ إِلَـٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللَّهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ} \"" وقال تعالى: {إِذْ جَعَلَ ٱلَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فِي قُلُوبِهِمُ ٱلْحَمِيَّةَ حَمِيَّةَ ٱلْجَاهِلِيَّةِ فَأَنزَلَ ٱللَّهُ سَكِينَتَهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ وَعَلَى ٱلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَأَلْزَمَهُمْ كَلِمَةَ ٱلتَّقْوَىٰ وَكَانُوۤاْ أَحَقَّ بِهَا وَأَهْلَهَا} [الفتح: 26] وهي لا إله إلا الله محمد رسول الله ٱستكبر عنها المشركون يوم الْحُدَيْبِيَة يوم كاتبهم رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم على قضية المدّة ذكر هذا الخبر البيهقي، والذي قبله القشيري.","Abu Hurairah reported that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: ""Allah, the Most High, revealed in His Book, mentioning a people who were arrogant, and said: 'Indeed, they were those who, when it was said to them, ""There is no god except Allah,"" were arrogant.' And Allah, the Most High, said: 'When those who disbelieved put into their hearts their [sheer] ardor - the ardor of the time of ignorance - and Allah sent down His tranquility upon His Messenger and upon the believers and made them adhere to the word of righteousness, and they were more worthy of it and its owner.' [Al-Fath: 26] And it is 'There is no god except Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.' The polytheists were arrogant about it on the day of Al-Hudaybiyah, the day the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) wrote to them about the treaty. This news was mentioned by Al-Bayhaqi, and the one before it by Al-Qushayri."
21,أي ويقولون عندما يُدعون إلى التوحيد: أنترك عبادة الأوثان لقول شاعرٍ مجنون؟,"They say, ""Shall we abandon the worship of idols at the word of a mad poet?"""
22,2 - التأكيد بإِن واللام {إِنَّ إِلَـٰهَكُمْ لَوَاحِدٌ} ومقتضى الكلام يقتضيه لإِنكار المخاطبين للوحدانية.,"2 - Emphasizing with ""Inn"" and ""Al-Lam"" {Indeed, your God is One} and the context of the speech requires it due to the denial of the oneness by the addressees."
23,4 - الإِيجاز بالحذف {إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لاَ إِلَـٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللَّهُ} أي قولوا لا إله إلا الله، وحذف لدلالة السياق عليه.,"4 - Brevity by omission {When it is said to them, ""There is no god but Allah""} that is, say ""There is no god but Allah,"" and it is omitted because the context indicates it."
24,{إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوۤاْ} فى الدنيا {إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ} على سبيل النصيحة والدعوة إلى الحق {لاَ إِلَـٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللَّهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ} عن قبول هذه النصيحة، ويعرضون عنها، ويصرون على كفرهم وجحودهم للحق، ويستكبرون عن النطق بكلمة الإِيمان.,"""Indeed, they were, in this world, when it was said to them, 'There is no god but Allah,' they would be arrogant, turning away from it, insisting on their disbelief and denial of the truth, and being arrogant about uttering the word of faith."""
25,{وَيَقُولُونَ} لمن نصحهم {أَإِنَّا لَتَارِكُوۤاْ آلِهَتِنَا لِشَاعِرٍ مَّجْنُونٍ}.,"""And they say, 'Shall we leave our gods for a mad poet?'"""
26,أى ويقولون باستهزاء وغرور لمن دعاهم إلى الإيمان وإلى قول لا إله إلا الله، يقولون له أتدعونا إلى أن نترك ما عليه آباؤنا وأجدادنا عن عقائد وأفعال، وإلى أن نتبع ما جاءنا به هذا الشاعر المجنون.,"They say mockingly and arrogantly to those who invite them to faith and to say there is no god but Allah, ""Do you invite us to abandon what our fathers and forefathers were upon in terms of beliefs and deeds, and to follow what this mad poet has brought us?"""
27,ويعنون بالشاعر المجنون - قبحهم الله - رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم الذى أرسله الله - تعالى - لهدايتهم.,"They refer to the poet who is called insane - may Allah curse them - as the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, whom Allah - the Most High - sent for their guidance."
28,ولذا رد الله - تعالى - عليهم بقوله {بَلْ جَآءَ بِٱلْحَقِّ وَصَدَّقَ ٱلْمُرْسَلِينَ}.,"Therefore, Allah - the Exalted - responded to them with His saying: ""Nay, he has brought the truth and confirmed the Messengers."""
29,أى ليس الرسول صلى الله عليه وسلم شاعرا أو مجنونا، كما زعمتم - أيها الجاهلون - بل هو رسول صادق فيما يبلغه عن ربه، وقد جاءكم بالحق وهو دين التوحيد الذى دعا إليه جميع الرسل، فكان مصدقا لهم فى الدعوة إليه، فكيف تزعمون أنه شاعر مجنون؟,"Any, the Messenger, may God bless him and grant him peace, is neither a poet nor a madman, as you claim - O ignorant ones - but he is a truthful messenger in what he conveys from his Lord, and he has brought you the truth, which is the religion of monotheism that all the messengers called to, so he was a confirmation of them in the call to it, so how do you claim that he is a poet and madman?"
30,{(35) إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لاَ إِلهَ إِلاّ اللهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ}.,"""Indeed, they were those who, when it was said to them, 'There is no god except Allah,' they were arrogant."""
31,(36) وَيَقُولُونَ أَئِنّا لَتَارِكُوا آلِهَتِنَا لِشَاعِرٍ مَجْنُونٍ يعنون النبيّ صلّى الله عليه وآله.,"(36) And they say, ""Shall we leave our gods for a mad poet?"" They mean the Prophet, peace be upon him and his family."
32,{(37) بَلْ جَاءَ بِالحَقِّ وَصَدَقَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ} ردّ عليهم بأنّ ما جاء به من التوحيد حقّ قام به البرهان وتطابق عليه المرسلون.,"{(37) Rather, he brought the truth and confirmed the Messengers.} He responded to them that what he brought of monotheism is the truth, which is supported by evidence and agreed upon by the Messengers."
