,original_sentence,translation
0,ويحتمل أن يكون الخطاب في قوله {إنكم} للمكلفين جميعاً فيصح الاستثناء المتصل مطلقاً أي تذوقون العذاب الأليم.,"It is possible that the speech in His saying {Indeed, you} is addressed to all those who are commanded, so the connected exception is absolutely valid, meaning: ""You will taste the painful punishment."""
1,ثم قال (تعالى): {إِنَّا كَذَلِكَ نَفْعَلُ بِٱلْمُجْرِمِينَ} أي: يقول الله جل ذكره: إنا هكذا نفعل بالذين اكتسبوا الكفر والمعاصي في الدنيا، ثم بَيَّنَ أَنّ مِنْ كُفرهم أنهم كانوا إذا قيل لهم: لا إله إلا الله، يستكبرون، أي: إذا قيل لهم في الدنيا: قولوا لا إله إلا الله، يستكبرون عن قولها، أي: يتعظمون، وحذفت قولوا لدلالة الكلام عليها.,"Then He (the Exalted) said: {Indeed, thus do We deal with the criminals} (Qur'an 37:34), meaning: Allah, the Exalted in Might, says: ""We do this to those who have earned disbelief and disobedience in this world."" Then He explained that from their disbelief is that when they were told, ""There is no god but Allah,"" they would be arrogant, meaning: when they were told in this world, ""Say, 'There is no god but Allah,'"" they would be too proud to say it, meaning: they would consider themselves too great. The word ""say"" was omitted because the context implies it."
2,ثم قال (تعالى): {إِنَّكُمْ لَذَآئِقُو ٱلْعَذَابِ ٱلأَلِيمِ} أي: إنكم أيها القائلون لمحمد صلى الله عليه وسلم: (شاعر مجنون، والمتعظمون عن قول: لا إله إلا الله)، لذائقوا العذاب الموجع في الآخرة.,"Then He (the Exalted) said: {Indeed, you will taste the painful punishment} meaning: Indeed, you who say to Muhammad, peace be upon him: ""A poet, a madman,"" and those who are too arrogant to say: ""There is no god but Allah,"" will taste the painful punishment in the Hereafter."
3,{إنا كذلك}: أي مثل هذا الفعل بهؤلاء نفعل بكل مجرم، فيترتب على إجرامه عذابه.,"""We do likewise: that is, we do the same to every criminal, so that his crime results in his punishment."""
4,وقوله {إنا كذلك نفعل بالمجرمين} تأكيد لتحقيق العذاب، والمراد بالمجرمين المشركون بدليل قوله بعد {إنهم إذا قيل لهم لا إله إلا الله يستكبرون} أي إذا عرض عليهم التوحيد أن يؤمنوا به أو كلمة الإِخلاص أن يقولوها استمروا على استكبارهم ولم يقبلوا.,"""His saying, 'Indeed, thus We do to the criminals,' is an affirmation of the realization of punishment. The criminals referred to are the polytheists, as indicated by His subsequent statement, 'Indeed, when it is said to them, ""There is no god except Allah,"" they are arrogant.' That is, when they are presented with monotheism to believe in it or the word of sincerity to say it, they persist in their arrogance and do not accept it."""
5,{إِنا كذلك نفعل بالمجرمين} المشركين، أي: مثل ذلك الفعل نفعل بكل مجرم.,"""Indeed, thus do We deal with the criminals"" the polytheists, that is: like that deed We do with every criminal."
6,{إِنَّا كَذَلِكَ} أي مثل هذا الفعل {نَفْعَلُ بِٱلْمُجْرِمِينَ} أي المشركين.,"""Indeed, thus do We deal with the criminals,"" that is, the polytheists."
7,ثم بين - سبحانه - الأسباب التى أدت بالكافرين جميعا إلى هذا المصير السيئ فقال {إِنَّا كَذَلِكَ نَفْعَلُ بِٱلْمُجْرِمِينَ} أى مثل هذا العذاب الأليم نفعل بالمجرمين، لأنهم أشركوا معنا غيرنا فى العبادة، وآذوا رسلنا الذين جاءوا لهدايتهم وإرشادهم.,"Then He, the Exalted, explained the reasons that led all the disbelievers to this miserable fate, saying: ""Thus do We deal with the criminals,"" that is, like this painful torment We deal with the criminals, because they associated others with Us in worship, and harmed Our messengers who came to guide and direct them."
8,{(34) إِنّا كَذَلِكَ نَفْعَلُ بِالْمُجْرِمِينَ} بالمشركين.,"""Indeed, thus do We deal with the criminals, the polytheists."""
