,original_sentence,translation
0,{وَ} إن ادعيتم إكراهنا إياكم حينئذ فقد كذبتم؛ إذ {مَا كَانَ لَنَا عَلَيْكُمْ مِّن سُلْطَانٍ} وغلبة إلى حد تخافون عن قهرنا وإهلاكنا، لو لم تكفروا {بَلْ كُنتُمْ} في أنفسكم كما كنا {قَوْماً طَاغِينَ} [الصافات: 30] طغيتم وبغيتم على الله كما طغينا وبغينا.,"""And if you claim that we coerced you, then you have lied; for we had no authority over you, nor could we overpower you to the extent that you would fear our domination and destruction, had you not disbelieved. Rather, you were, in yourselves, as we were, a people who transgressed. You transgressed and rebelled against Allah, just as we transgressed and rebelled."""
1,{وَمَا كَانَ لَنَا عَلَيْكُمْ مِّن سُلْطَانٍ} أي: من قدرة ولا حجة فنصدكم بها عن الحق والأيمان، {بَلْ كُنتُمْ قَوْماً طَاغِينَ} (أي طاغين) على الله، متعدين إلى ما ليس لكم بحق (من) معصية الله.,"""And we had no authority over you"" meaning: no power nor argument to turn you away from the truth and faith, ""but you were a people transgressing"" (meaning transgressing) against Allah, exceeding into what is not rightfully yours (of) disobeying Allah."
2,وقال الزمخشري: وأعرضتم مع تمكنكم واختباركم، بل كنتم قوماً على الكفر غير ملجئين، وما كان لنا عليكم من تسلط نسلبكم به تمكنكم واختباركم، بل كنتم قوماً مختارين الطغيان.,"He said, ""And you turned away while you were able and tested, but you were a people who chose to be disbelievers, and we had no power over you to take away your ability and test, but you were a people who chose to transgress."""
3,فيقول المتبوعون لم قبلتم منا ولا سلطان لنا عليكم؟,"The leaders will say, ""Why did you follow us when we had no authority over you?"""
4,وقوله {قالوا بل لم تكونوا مؤمنين وما كان لنا عليكم من سلطان} إلى قوله {غاوين} جواب المتبوعين بتبرئة أنفسهم من إشقاء التابعين وأن جرمهم مستند إلى سوء اختيار أنفسهم.,"And His saying, ""They said, 'Rather, you were not believers, and we had no authority over you,'"" to His saying, ""misguided."" The response of the leaders is to absolve themselves of the misfortune of their followers, and to attribute their guilt to the poor choice of their own selves."
5,ثم قالوا {وما كان لنا عليكم من سلطان} وهو في معنى الجواب على فرض التسليم كأنه قيل ولو فرض أنه كان لكم إيمان فما كان لنا عليكم من سلطان حتى نسلبه منكم ونجردكم منه.,"Then they said, ""We had no authority over you,"" which is in the sense of a response assuming concession, as if it were said, ""Even if it were assumed that you had faith, we would have had no authority over you to take it away from you and strip you of it."""
6,ثم قالوا {بل كنتم قوماً طاغين} والطغيان هو التجاوز عن الحد وهو إضراب عن قوله {لم تكونوا مؤمنين} كأنه قيل ولم يكن سبب هلاككم مجرد الخلو من الإِيمان بل كنتم قوماً طاغين كما كنا مستكبرين طاغين فتعاضدنا جميعاً على ترك سبيل الرشد واتخاذ سبيل الغي فحق علينا كلمة العذاب التي قضى بها الله سبحانه قال تعالى {إن جهنم كانت مرصاداً للطاغين مآباً} النبأ 21 - 22 وقال {فأما من طغى وآثر الحياة الدنيا فإن الجحيم هي المأوى} النازعات 37 - 39.,"Then they said, ""Rather, you were a transgressing people."" And transgression is exceeding the limit. This is a departure from their saying, ""You were not believers."" It is as if it was said, ""And the cause of your destruction was not merely the absence of faith, but you were a transgressing people, just as we were arrogant transgressors. So we all joined together to leave the path of righteousness and take the path of misguidance. Thus, the word of punishment, which Allah, the Exalted, has decreed, became due for us."" Allah, the Exalted, said, ""Indeed, Hell was, for the transgressors, a lying in wait, a return."" [Al-Naba' 21-22] And He said, ""But as for him who transgressed and preferred the worldly life, then indeed, Hell will be [his] residence."" [An-Nazi'at 37-39]."
7,{وَمَا كَانَ لَنَا عَلَيْكُمْ مِّن سُلْطَانٍ} أي من حجة في ترك الحق.,"""and we had no authority over you"" that is, no argument in leaving the truth."
8,{بَلْ كُنتُمْ قَوْماً طَاغِينَ} أي ضالين متجاوزين الحد.,"""Rather, you were a transgressing people."""
9,وقيل: ظلموا أنفسهم بمخالفتهم أمر الله سبحانه وبتكذيبهم الرسل.,"It is said: They wronged themselves by disobeying the command of Allah, the Exalted, and by denying the messengers."
10,30 - وما كان لنا من تسلط عليكم نسلبكم به اختياركم، بل كنتم قوماً خارجين على الحق.,"30 - ""And we had no power over you to make you choose, but you were a people who transgressed."""
11,وثانيها يتجلى فى قوله - تعالى - {وَمَا كَانَ لَنَا عَلَيْكُمْ مِّن سُلْطَانٍ} أى وما كان لنا عليكم من قوة أو غلبة تجبركم على البقاء فى الكفر والضلال، ولكنكم أنتم الذين رضيتم بالكفر عن اختيار واقتناع منكم به.,"And the second is evident in His saying - the Most High - {And we had no authority over you} that is, we had no power or dominance over you to force you to remain in disbelief and misguidance, but rather, you are the ones who chose disbelief and were convinced by it."
12,وثالثها قوله - تعالى - {بَلْ كُنتُمْ قَوْماً طَاغِينَ} أى نحن لم يكن لنا سلطان عليكم، بل أنتم الذين كنتم فى الدنيا قوما طاغين وضالين مثلنا.,"""Thirdly, His saying - the Most High - {But you were a people transgressing} [Quran 56:46], that is, 'We had no authority over you, but you were in the world a people transgressing and astray like us.'"""
13,والطغيان مجاوزة الحد فى كل شئ.,"""Tyranny is exceeding the limit in everything."""
14,وما كان لنا عليكم من سلطان: أي من حجة ولا قوة على حملكم على الشرك والشر والباطل.,"And We had no authority over you: that is, no argument nor power to make you commit to polytheism, evil, and falsehood."
15,بل كنتم قوما طاغين: أي بل كنتم طغاة ظلمة تعبدون غير الله وتجبرون الناس على ذلك.,"You were a people who transgressed: that is, you were oppressors who worshipped other than Allah and forced people to do the same."
16,هذا أولا وثانيا ما كان لنا عليكم من سلطان أي من حجج قوية أقنعناكم بها، ولا قدرة لنا أزهقناكم فاتبعتمونا، بل كنتم أنتم قوما طاغين أي ظلمة متجاوزين الحد في الإِسراف والظلم والشر.,"This is first and secondly, we had no authority over you, that is, no strong arguments to convince you, nor had we the power to force you, so you followed us. Rather, you were a people who transgressed, that is, you were unjust, exceeding the limit in extravagance, injustice, and evil."
17,{(30) وَمَا كَانَ لَنَا عَلَيْكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ بَلْ كُنْتُمْ قَوْمًا طَاغِينَ} {(31) فَحَقَّ عَلَيْنَا قَوْلُ رَبِّنَا إِنَّا لَذَائِقُونَ}.,"(30) ""And we had no authority over you, but you were a people who transgressed."" (31) ""So the word of our Lord was justified upon us; indeed, we will taste [the punishment]."""
