,original_sentence,translation
0,والمعنى بل أبيتم أنتم الإيمان وأعرضتم عنه كما أعرضنا.,"And the meaning is that you refused to believe and turned away from it, just as we did."
1,{قَالُواْ} أي: الرؤساء في جواب الضعفاء: ما قولكم هذا إلا افتراء منكم إيانا ومراء، كيف نؤثر نحن في قلوبكم بحيلنا ومركنا، أو بعطائنا المال إليكم والإحسان عليكم لو كنتم مؤمنين، والإيمان من أفعال القلوب {بَلْ لَّمْ تَكُونُواْ} في أنفسكم {مُؤْمِنِينَ} [الصافات: 29] مصدقين، فتميلون على ما كنا عليه طبعاً وهوى، فتفترون اليوم علينا مراء.,"They said, ""O leaders, in response to the weak: Your saying this is nothing but a lie from you to us and a deception. How could we influence your hearts with our tricks and strength, or by giving you money and being kind to you if you were believers, and faith is an act of the heart? Rather, you were not believers in yourselves, so you inclined towards what we were upon by nature and desire, and today you falsely accuse us."""
2,{قالوا بل لم تكونوا مؤمنين} أَيْ: إنَّما الكفر من قِبَلِكم.,"They said, ""Nay, you were not believers."" That is, the disbelief was from yourselves."
3,فقالوا بل لم تكونوا مؤمنين أي لم نكن نحن السبب الموجب لإِجرامكم وهلاككم بخلوكم عن الإِيمان بل لم تكونوا مؤمنين لا أنا جردناكم من الإِيمان.,"They said, ""Rather, you were not believers. We were not the cause of your crime and destruction due to your lack of faith. Rather, you were not believers; it is not that we stripped you of faith."""
4,والمعنى أنكم لم تكونوا مؤمنين قطّ حتى ننقلكم عن الإيمان إلى الكفر، بل كنتم من الأصل على الكفر، فأقمتم عليه.,"The meaning is that you were never believers at all, so that we would transfer you from faith to disbelief. Rather, you were originally in disbelief, and you persisted in it."
5,{قالوا} أي: الرؤساء: {بل لم تكونوا مؤمنين} أي: بل أنتم أبيتم الإيمان، وأعرضتم عنه مع تمكُّنكم منه، مختارين للكفر، غير ملجئين إليه، أو: بل أنتم سبقت منكم الضلالة على إغوائنا، وإنما نشأ عن إغوائنا دوام كُفركم لا استئنافه.,"They said, ""Rather, you were not believers."" That is, you refused to believe and turned away from it, even though you were able to do so, choosing disbelief and not being compelled to it. Or, rather, your misguidance preceded our seduction, and our seduction only resulted in the continuation of your disbelief, not its initiation."
6,وقيل: من قول الرؤساء أي لم تكونوا مؤمنين قط حتى ننقلكم منه إلى الكفر، بل كنتم على الكفر فأقمتم عليه للإلف والعادة.,"It was said: ""From the saying of the leaders, 'You were never believers, so that we would transfer you from it to disbelief. Rather, you were in disbelief and you persisted in it due to familiarity and habit.'"""
7,أولها {قَالُواْ بَلْ لَّمْ تَكُونُواْ مُؤْمِنِينَ} أى قال الرؤساء للأتباع نحن لم نتسبب فى كفركم فى الدنيا، بل أنتم الذين أبيتم الإِيمان باختياركم، وآثرتم عليه الكفر باختياركم - أيضا - فكفركم نابع من ذواتكم، وليس من شئ خارج عنكم، ولم يدخل الإِيمان قلوبكم فى وقت من الأوقات.,"First of them {they said: ""Nay, you were not believers""} that is, the leaders said to the followers: ""We did not cause your disbelief in the world, but you are the ones who refused faith by your choice, and you preferred disbelief over it by your choice as well. So, your disbelief stems from yourselves, not from something outside of you, and faith never entered your hearts at any time."""
8,أى نحن وأنتم لم تكونوا مؤمنين أصلا.,We and you were not believers to begin with.
