,original_sentence,translation
0,"قوله: (عن جميع أقوالهم وأفعالهم) أي لما في الحديث: \"" لا تزول قدم ابن آدم يوم القيامة حتى يسأل عن أربع: عن شبابه فيما أبلاه، وعن عمره في أفناه، وعن ماله من أين اكتسبه وفيم أنفقه، وعن علمه ماذا عمل به \"" قوله: (ويقال لهم) أي والقائل خزنة جهنم.","His saying: (about all their sayings and deeds) means what is in the hadith: ""The foot of the son of Adam will not move on the Day of Resurrection until he is asked about four things: about his youth and how he spent it, about his life and how he spent it, about his wealth and where he earned it and how he spent it, and about his knowledge and what he did with it."" His saying: (and it will be said to them) means the speaker is the guards of Hell."
1,قال مجاهد: ولا تزول من بين يدي الله تعالى قدم عبد حتى يُسأل عن خصال أربع: عمره فيهم أفناه، وجسده فيم أبلاه، وماله مم اكتسبه وفيم أنفقه، وعلمه ما عمل فيه.,"Mujahid said: ""No servant's feet will move from before Allah the Exalted until he is asked about four things: his life, how he spent it; his body, how he wore it out; his wealth, how he earned it and how he spent it; and his knowledge, what he did with it."""
2,وليس هذا بمناف لقوله: {فَلاَ أَنسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلاَ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ} [المؤمنون: 101]، لأن معنى هذا: لا يتساءلون بالأنساب والأرحام كما كانوا في الدنيا فيقول بعضهم لبعض: أسألك بالله والرحم.,"This is not contrary to His saying: {On that Day no intercession will avail, nor will anyone ask for it, except for those for whom the Most Merciful will have granted permission and whose word is acceptable to Him.} [Al-Mu'minun: 101], because the meaning of this is: they will not ask each other for kinship and family ties as they did in this world, saying to each other: ""I ask you by Allah and by kinship."""
3,"وفي الحديث: \"" لا تزول قدما عبد حتى يسأل عن خمس شبابه فيما أبلاه، وعن عمره فيما أفناه، وعن ماله كيف اكتسبه وفيما أنفقه، وعن ما عمل فيما علم \"" وقال ابن عطية: ويحتمل أن يكون المعنى على نحو ما فسره بقوله: {ما لكم لا تناصرون}، أي إنهم مسئولون عن امتناعهم عن التناصر، وهذا على سبيل التوبيخ في الامتناع.","In the hadith: ""A servant's feet will not move until he is asked about five things: his youth and how he spent it, his life and how he wasted it, his wealth and how he earned it and how he spent it, and his knowledge and what he did with it."" Ibn Attiyah said: ""It is possible that the meaning is as he interpreted it, saying: 'Why do you not help each other?' meaning that they will be asked about their refusal to help each other, and this is a form of reproach for their refusal."""
4,وما الذي طرقكم لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً، ولا يغيث بعضكم بعضاً، بعدما كنتم تزعمون في الدنيا، أن آلهتكم ستدفع عنكم العذاب وتغيثكم وتشفع لكم عند اللّه، فكأنهم لا يجيبون هذا السؤال، لأنهم قد علاهم الذل والصغار، واستسلموا لعذاب النار، وخشعوا وخضعوا وأبلسوا، فلم ينطقوا.,"What has struck you that you do not help one another, nor come to the aid of one another, after you used to claim in the world that your gods would ward off punishment from you, come to your aid, and intercede for you with Allah? It is as if they do not answer this question, for humiliation and abasement have overcome them, and they have surrendered to the torment of the Fire, humbled and subdued, and they are struck dumb."
5,"وفي الخصال عن أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم \"" لا تزول قدم عبد يوم القيامة حتى يسأل عن أربع عن عمره فيما أفناه، وشبابه فيما أبلاه، وعن ماله من أين كسبه وفيما أنفقه، وعن حبنا أهل البيت \"" أقول وروى في العلل عنه صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم مثله.","""In the book of Khisal, from the Commander of the Faithful (peace be upon him), he said, 'The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his family) said, 'A servant's foot will not move on the Day of Resurrection until he is asked about four things: his age and how he spent it, his youth and how he wore it out, his wealth and how he earned it and how he spent it, and his love for us, the Ahl al-Bayt.' I say, and in Al-'Ilal, it was narrated from him (peace be upon him and his family) in a similar manner."""
6,"وفي الدر المنثور أخرج البخاري في تاريخه والترمذي والدارمي وابن جرير وابن المنذر وابن أبي حاتم والحاكم وابن مردويه عن أنس قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم \"" ما من داع دعا إلى شيء إلا كان موقوفاً يوم القيامة لازماً به لا يفارقه وإن دعا رجل رجلاً ثم قرأ {وقفوهم إنهم مسؤولون} \"" وفي روضة الكافي بإسناده عن محمد بن إسحاق المدني عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم في حديث وأما قوله {أُولئك لهم رزق معلوم} قال يعلمه الخدام فيأتون به إلى أولياء الله قبل أن يسألوهم إياه.","""And in Al-Durr Al-Manthur, Al-Bukhari mentioned in his history, Al-Tirmidhi, Al-Darimi, Ibn Jarir, Ibn Al-Mundhir, Ibn Abi Hatim, Al-Hakim, and Ibn Marduyah narrated from Anas that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his family) said, 'There is no caller who calls to something except that he will be held accountable for it on the Day of Resurrection, and it will be attached to him and will not leave him. And if a man calls another man, then he recited, ""And stop them, indeed, they are to be questioned.""' And in Rawdat Al-Kafi, with his chain of narration, from Muhammad ibn Ishaq Al-Madani, from Abu Ja'far (peace be upon him), from the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), in a hadith, 'As for His saying, ""Those, for them is a known provision,"" He said, ""The servants know it and bring it to the friends of Allah before they ask for it.""'"
7,"وأخرج البخاري في تاريخه، والدارمي، والترمذي، وابن جرير، وابن المنذر، وابن أبي حاتم، والحاكم وصححه، وابن مردويه عن أنس قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم \"" ما من داع دعا إلى شيء إلا كان موقوفاً معه يوم القيامة لازماً به لا يفارقه، وإن دعا رجل رجلاً \"" ثم قرأ {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُون}.","""Al-Bukhari in his history, Al-Darimi, Al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Jarir, Ibn Al-Mundhir, Ibn Abi Hatim, Al-Hakim and authenticated it, and Ibn Marduyah narrated from Anas that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said: 'There is no one who calls to something but he will be held accountable for it on the Day of Resurrection, and it will be attached to him, not leaving him. And if a man calls another man.' Then he recited: 'And stop them, indeed they are to be questioned.'"""
8,"وفي الحديث: \"" اتَّخِذُوا يداً عند الفقراءِ، فإن لهم دَوْلَة يومَ القيامة \"" ودولتهم: الشفاعة فيمن أحبهم وأحسن إليهم.","In the hadith: ""Make a hand for the poor, for they have a state on the Day of Resurrection."" And their state is: intercession for those who love them and do good to them."
9,النحاس: وإنما غلط الجاهل باللغة فتوهّم أن هذا من قوله: {فَلاَ أَنسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلاَ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ} [المؤمنون: 101] إنما هو لا يتساءلون بالأرحام، فيقول أحدهم: أسألك بالرحم الذي بيني وبينك لما نفعتني، أو أسقطت لي حقاً لك عليّ، أو وهبت لي حسنة.,"Al-Nahhas: The ignorant person who is unfamiliar with the language mistakenly thought that this is from His saying: {On that Day no intercession will profit, nor will anyone ask for another's forgiveness, except for those for whom the Most Gracious wills and whose word is acceptable to Him.} [Al-Mu'minun: 101] It is only that they do not ask for each other's forgiveness through kinship, so one of them would say: I ask you for the sake of the kinship between me and you to benefit me, or to drop a right you have over me, or to give me a good deed."
10,"وفي الخبر عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم قال: \"" لا تزول قدما ابن آدم يوم القيامة حتى يُسأَل عن أربعة أشياء: عن شبابه فيما أبلاه، وعن عمره فيما أفناه، وعن ماله من أين اكتسبه وفِيمَ أنفقه، وعن علمه ماذا عمل به \"".","""In the hadith of the Prophet, peace be upon him, he said: 'The feet of the son of Adam will not move on the Day of Resurrection until he is asked about four things: about his youth and how he spent it, about his life and how he spent it, about his wealth and how he earned it and how he spent it, and about his knowledge and what he did with it.'"""
11,"وقال ابن أبي حاتم حدثنا أبي، حدثنا النفيلي، حدثنا المعتمر بن سليمان قال سمعت ليثاً يحدث عن بشر عن أنس بن مالك رضي الله عنه قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم \"" أيما داع دعا إلى شيء، كان موقوفاً معه إلى يوم القيامة، لا يغادره، ولا يفارقه، وإن دعا رجل رجلاً \"" ثم قرأ {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ} ورواه الترمذي من حديث ليث بن أبي سليم، ورواه ابن جرير عن يعقوب بن إبراهيم عن معتمر عن ليث عن رجل عن أنس رضي الله عنه مرفوعاً.","Ibn Abi Hatim said: My father told us, Al-Nufayli told us, Al-Mu'tamir bin Sulaiman said: I heard Layth narrating from Bishr from Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, who said: The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, ""Whoever invites to something, will be held accountable for it on the Day of Resurrection, and will not leave it nor separate from it. And if a man invites another man."" Then he recited, ""And stop them, indeed they are to be questioned."" Al-Tirmidhi narrated it from the hadith of Layth bin Abi Sulaym, and Ibn Jarir narrated it from Ya'qub bin Ibrahim from Al-Mu'tamir from Layth from a man from Anas, may Allah be pleased with him, in a Mawquf narration."
12,"قال القاضي أبو محمد: وهذا قول متجه عام في الهزء وغيره وروى أنس بن مالك عن النبي عليه السلام أنه قال \"" أيما رجل دعا رجلاً إلى شيء كان لازماً له \""، وقرأ {وقفوهم إنهم مسؤولون}، وروى ابن مسعود، عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم أنه قال \"" لا تزول قدماً عبد من بين يدي الله تعالى حتى يسأله عن خمس، عن شبابه فيما أبلاه، وعن عمره فيما أفناه، وعن ماله فيما أنفقه، وكيف كسبه، وعما عمل فيما علم \""، ويحتمل عندي أن يكون المعنى على نحو ما فسره بقوله {ما لكم لا تناصرون} أي أنكم مسؤولون عن امتناعهم عن التناصر، وهذا على جهة التوبيخ في هذا الفصل خاصة أعني الامتناع من التناصر، وقرأ \"" تناصرون \"" بتاء واحدة خفيفة، شيبة ونافع، وقرأ خلق \"" لا تتناصرون \""، وكذلك في حرف عبد الله، وقرأ أبو جعفر بن القعقاع \"" لا تناصرون \"" بإدغام التاء من قراءة عبد الله بن مسعود وقال الثعلبي قوله: {ما لكم لا تناصرون} جواب أبي جهل حين قال في بدر نحن جميع منتصر، ثم أخبر تعالى عن أنهم في ذلك اليوم في حالة الاستسلام والإلقاء باليد.","The judge Abu Muhammad said: ""This is a general statement about mockery and other things."" Anas bin Malik narrated from the Prophet, peace be upon him, that he said, ""Whoever invites someone to something, it becomes obligatory for him."" And he recited, ""And stop them, for they are to be questioned."" Ibn Mas'ud narrated from the Prophet, peace be upon him, that he said, ""No servant will move from before Allah, the Most High, until he is asked about five things: about his youth and how he spent it, about his life and how he spent it, about his wealth and how he earned it, and about his knowledge and what he did with it."" It is possible to me that the meaning is as he interpreted it by saying, ""What is the matter with you that you do not help one another?"" meaning that you will be asked about their refraining from helping one another, and this is in the way of reproach in this particular chapter, meaning refraining from helping one another. Shubah and Nafi' recited ""you do not help one another"" with one light ta', and a group recited ""you do not help one another,"" and similarly in the reading of Abdullah. Abu Ja'far bin al-Qa'qa' recited ""you do not help one another"" by assimilating the ta' from the reading of Abdullah bin Mas'ud. Al-Tha'labi said, ""What is the matter with you that you do not help one another?"" is the response to Abu Jahl when he said in Badr, ""We are all avengers."" Then Allah, the Most High, informed that on that day they will be in a state of surrender and submission."
13,"قوله: {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ}: مقامُ السؤالِ مقامٌ صعبٌ؛ قوم يسألهم المَلَكُ وقومٌ يسألهم المَلِكُ؛ فالذين تسألهم الملائكةُ أقوامٌ لهم أعمالٌ صالحةٌ تصلح للعرض والكشف، وأقوامٌ لهم أعمالٌ لا تصلح للكشف، وهم قسمان: الخواصّ يسترهم الحقّ عن اطلاع الخلق عليهم في الدنيا والآخرة، وأقوامٌ هم أربابُ الزلات يرحمهم اللَّهُ فلا يفضحهم، ثم إنهم يكونون في بعض أحوالهم بنعت الهيبة، وفي بعض أحوالهم بنعت البسط والقربة، وفي الخبر: \"" أن قوماً يسترهم بيده ويقول تذكر غداً ربك \"" وهؤلاء أصحاب الخصوص في التحقيق: فأما الأغيار والأجانب والكفار فيقال لهم: {كَفَىٰ بِنَفْسِكَ ٱلْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكَ حَسِيباً} [الإسراء: 14]، فإذا قَرؤوا كتابهم يقال لهم: من عمل هذا؟","His saying: {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ}: The position of questioning is difficult; a people whom the angel questions and a people whom the king questions; those whom the angels question are people with good deeds that are fit for presentation and revelation, and people with deeds that are not fit for revelation, and they are two sections: the special ones whom the Truth conceals from the creation's knowledge of them in this world and the hereafter, and people who are the owners of mistakes whom Allah has mercy on and does not expose, then they are in some of their states with the attribute of awe, and in some of their states with the attribute of expansion and closeness, and in the news: ""That a people whom He conceals with His hand and says, 'Remember your Lord tomorrow,'"" and these are the companions of specialness in realization: As for the strangers, foreigners, and disbelievers, it is said to them: {كَفَىٰ بِنَفْسِكَ ٱلْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكَ حَسِيباً} [الإسراء: 14], and when they read their book, it is said to them: ""Who did this?"""
14,"\"" عن شبابه فيما أبلاه \"" أخرجه الترمذي وله عن أنس أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم \"" قال ما من داع دعا إلى شيء إلا كان موقوفاً يوم القيامة لازماً به لا يفارقه وإن دعا رجل رجلاً \"" ثم قرأ {وقفوهم إنهم مسؤولون ما لكم لا تناصرون} أي تقول لهم خزنة جهنم توبيخاً لهم ما لكم لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً وهذا جواب لأبي جهل حيث قال يوم بدر نحن جميع منتصر قال الله تعالى: {بل هم اليوم مستسلمون} قال ابن عباس خاضعون.","""About his youth, in what he has worn out"" is narrated by Al-Tirmidhi. And from Anas, that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah's prayers and peace be upon him, said: ""There is no caller who calls to something except that he will be stopped on the Day of Resurrection, bound by it, not leaving him. And if a man calls another man,"" then he recited: ""{And stop them, indeed, they [are to be] questioned. What is [the matter] with you that you assist one another?}"" meaning, the guards of Hell will say to them, reproaching them, ""What is [the matter] with you that you do not help one another?"" And this is a response to Abu Jahl, who said on the day of Badr, ""We are all victorious."" Allah, the Most High, said: ""{But indeed, they are today submissive.}"" Ibn Abbas said, ""Humbled."""
15,"{إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ} قال الجمهور عن أعمالهم وفي الحديث \"" لا تزول قدما عبد حتى يسأل عن خمس شبابه فيما أبلاه وعمره فيما أفناه وعن ماله كيف اكتسبه وفيما أنفقه وعن ما عمل فيما علم \"". {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} جواب أبي جهل حين قال في بدر نحن جميع منتصر.","""They will be questioned"" about their deeds. In a hadith, it is said, ""A servant's feet will not move until he is asked about five things: his youth and how he spent it, his life and how he wasted it, his wealth and how he earned it and how he spent it, and his knowledge and what he did with it."" ""Why do you not help each other?"" This is the response of Abu Jahl when he said at Badr, ""We are all victorious."""
16,أي: ما لكم لا ينصركم الأصنام التي عبدتموها في الدنيا رجاء النصر والشفاعة؛ كقوله: {هَـٰؤُلاۤءِ شُفَعَاؤُنَا عِندَ ٱللَّهِ} [يونس: 18]، وقوله: {مَا نَعْبُدُهُمْ إِلاَّ لِيُقَرِّبُونَآ إِلَى ٱللَّهِ زُلْفَىۤ} [الزمر: 3].,"That is: What is the matter with you that the idols you worshipped in the world for the hope of victory and intercession do not help you; as His saying: {These are our intercessors with Allah} [Yunus: 18], and His saying: {We worship them only that they may bring us nearer to Allah} [Az-Zumar: 3]."
17,وفي العلل عنه عليه السلام انّه قال في تفسير هذه الآية لا يجاوز قدما عبد حتّى يسئل عن اربع عن شبابه فيما ابلاه وعن عمره فيما افناه وعن ماله من اين جمعه وفيما انفقه وعن حبّنا اهل البيت عليهم السلام.,"""In the traditions from him, peace be upon him, he said in the interpretation of this verse: 'No servant's feet will move until he is asked about four things: about his youth and how he spent it, about his life and how he spent it, about his wealth and where he earned it and how he spent it, and about his love for us, the people of the House, peace be upon them.'"""
