,original_sentence,translation
0,{مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ}؟,What is the matter with you? How do you judge?
1,{مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ}؟,"""What is the matter with you? How do you judge?"""
2,ومعنى {وَقِفُوهُم} أمر بإيقافهم في ابتداء السير بهم لما أفاده الأمر من الفور بقرينة فاء التعقيب التي عطفته، أي احبسوهم عن السير قَليلاً ليُسألوا سؤال تأييس وتحقير وتغليظ، فيقال لهم {ما لكم لا تناصرون}، أي ما لكم لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً فيدفع عنه الشقاء الذي هو فيه، وأين تناصركم الذي كنتم تتناصرون في الدنيا وتتألبون على الرسول وعلى المؤمنين.,"The meaning of {وَقِفُوهُم} is an order to stop them at the beginning of their journey, as indicated by the immediate nature of the command and the subsequent conjunction that connects it, meaning ""stop them briefly to be questioned with despair, humiliation, and severity."" It is said to them, {ما لكم لا تناصرون}, meaning ""Why do you not help each other, so that one of you can دفع about the misery he is in? Where is your mutual support that you used to have in the world and gather against the Messenger and the believers?"""
3,فالاستفهام في {ما لكم لا تناصرونَ} مستعمل في التعجيز مع التنبيه على الخطأ الذي كانوا فيه في الحياة الدنيا.,"The question in ""{What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?}"" is used to express helplessness while pointing out the error they were in during their worldly life."
4,وجملة {ما لكم لا تناصرون} مبيّنة لإبهام {مَسْؤُولُونَ} وهو استفهام مستعمل في التعجيب للتذكير بما يسوءهم، فظهر أن السؤال ليس على حقيقته وإنما أريد به لازمه وهو التعجيب، والمعنى أيّ شيء اختص بكم، فــــ {ما} الاستفهامية مبتدأ و {لكم} خبر عنه.,"""What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?"""
5,وجملة {لا تَنَاصَرُونَ} حال من ضمير {لكم} وهي مناط الاستفهام، أي أن هذه الحالة تستوجب التعجب من عدم تناصركم.,"""The sentence {you do not help each other} is a state of the pronoun {for you} and it is the subject of the question, meaning that this state requires wonder at your lack of helping each other."""
6,ثم قيل لهم من قبل الحق توبيخاً وتقريعاً: {مَا لَكُمْ} أي: ما شأنكم، وأي شيء عرض عليكم أيها الضالون المضلون {لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} [الصافات: 25] أي: لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً؛ أي: معبوداتكم لا تنصر بتخليص عابديهم مع أنكم اتخذتموهم أولياء واعتقدتموهم آلهة شفعاء، فلم لا ينصرونكم ولا ينقذونكم من عذابنا؟,"Then it was said to them by the Truth, as a rebuke and reprimand: ""{مَا لَكُمْ} [What is the matter with you?],"" that is, what is your situation, and what has happened to you, O misguided ones who misguide others? ""{لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} [you do not help each other]"" [As-Saffat: 25], that is, your deities do not help by saving their worshippers, even though you have taken them as protectors and believed them to be intercessor gods. So why do they not help you and save you from Our punishment?"
7,والرابع: سَألَهُمْ خزَنةُ جهنم {ألَمْ يَأتِكم نَذيرُ} [الملك: 8] ونحو هذا، قاله مقاتل.,"And the fourth: The guardians of Hell asked them, ""Did not a warner come to you?"" [Al-Mulk: 8] and the like, as stated by Muqatil."
8,والسادس: أن سؤالهم قوله {ما لكم لا تَنَاصَرونَ}؟!,"And the sixth: Their question is His saying, ""What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?!"""
9,قال المفسِّرون: المعنى: مالكم لا ينصُر بعضُكم بعضاً كما كنتم في الدنيا؟!,The interpreters said: The meaning: Why do you not help each other as you used to in the world?!
10,قالوا: بلى، ولكن حقت كلمة العذاب على الكافرين يقول الخازن: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} [آية: 25] نظيرها فى الشعراء: {هَلْ يَنصُرُونَكُمْ} [الشعراء: 93] يقول الكفار: ما لشركائكم الشياطين لا يمنعونكم من العذاب.,"They said, ""Yes, but the word of punishment has been justified upon the disbelievers."" The guardian says: ""What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?"" [Verse: 25] Its parallel in Ash-Shu'araa: ""Will they help you?"" [Ash-Shu'araa: 93] The disbelievers say: ""What is the matter with your partners, the devils, that they do not prevent you from the punishment?"""
11,{ما لكم لا تناصرون} على طريق التوبيخ والتقريع لهم، وفيهم ثلاثة أوجه: أحدها: لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً، قاله يحيى بن سلام.,"""What is wrong with you that you do not help one another?"" in a manner of reproach and rebuke, and there are three interpretations: one of them: ""you do not help one another,"" said Yahya ibn Salam."
12,{مالكم لا تناصرون} لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً.,"""What is the matter with you that you do not help one another?"""
13,ثم قال: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} أي: لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً كما كنتم تعملون في الدنيا.,"Then He said: ""Why do you not help each other, as you used to do in the world?"""
14,فلما انطُلِقَ بهم إلى جهنَّم أرسلَ مَلَكٌ يقولُ لِخَزَنَةِ جهنَّم: {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ}؛ أي اسألُهم في موضعِ الحساب، يُسأَلُوا ويعرفوا أعمالَهم، وهذا سؤالُ توبيخٍ لا سؤالُ استفهامٍ، قال ابنُ عبَّاس رَضِيَ اللهُ عَنْهُمَا: (إنَّهُمْ مَسْؤُولُونَ عَنْ أعْمَالِهِمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَأقَاويلِهِمْ)، وقال مقاتلُ: (تَسْأَلُهُمْ خَزَنَةُ جَهَنَّمَ: ألَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ نَذِيرٌ، ألَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِنْكُمْ).,"So when they are taken to Hell, an angel will say to the keepers of Hell: ""And stop them, for they are to be questioned""; that is, ask them at the place of reckoning, they will be asked and their deeds will be known, and this is a question of reproach, not a question of inquiry. Ibn Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) said: ""They will be questioned about their deeds in this world and their sayings,"" and Muqatil said: ""The keepers of Hell will ask them: 'Did not a warner come to you? Did not messengers come to you from among yourselves?'"""
15,ويجوزُ أن يكون هذا السؤالُ ما ذُكِرَ بعدُ، وهو قولهُ: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ}؛ أي يقالُ لَهم على سبيلِ التوبيخِ: ما لكم لا ينصرُ بعضُكم بعضاً كما كنتم في الدُّنيا.,"It is possible that this question is what is mentioned later, which is His saying: {What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?}; that is, it is said to them by way of reproach: Why do you not help each other as you used to in the world?"
16,فيقال لهم: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} أي: ما الذي جرى عليكم اليوم؟,"It is said to them: ""What is the matter with you that you do not help one another?"""
17,وهذه الوجوه لو صحت فإنما تشير إلى بعض مصاديق ما يسأل عنه والسياق يشهد أن السؤال هو ما يشتمل عليه قوله {ما لكم لا تناصرون} أي لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً كما كنتم تفعلونه في الدنيا فتستعينون به على حوائجكم ومقاصدكم، وما يتلوه من قوله {بل هم اليوم مستسلمون} أي مسلمون لا يستكبرون يدل على أن المراد بقوله {ما لكم لا تناصرون} السؤال عن استكبارهم عن طاعة الحق كما كانوا يستكبرون في الدنيا.,"These faces, if they are correct, only point to some of the manifestations of what is being asked about. The context indicates that the question is what is included in His saying, ""Why do you not help each other?"" meaning, why does not one of you help the other as you used to do in the world, seeking help for your needs and goals. And what follows it, ""But they are today submissive,"" meaning they are Muslims and do not act arrogantly, indicates that the meaning of ""Why do you not help each other?"" is the question about their arrogance towards obeying the truth, as they used to be arrogant in the world."
18,فالسؤال عن عدم تناصرهم سؤال عن سبب الاستكبار الذي كانوا عليه في الدنيا فقد تبين به أن المسؤول عنه هو كل حق أعرضوا عنه في الدنيا من اعتقاد حق أو عمل صالح استكباراً على الحق تظاهراً بالتناصر.,"The question of why they do not support each other is a question about the cause of the arrogance they had in this world. It has become clear that what is being asked about is every right they turned away from in this world, whether it was a belief in the truth or a righteous deed, out of arrogance towards the truth and a pretense of supporting each other."
19,ما لكم لا تناصرون، فينصر بعضكم بعضاً في هذا الموطن الهائل، بل هم اليوم منقادون لأمر الله، حتى يأذن لهم في الشفاعة.,"What is wrong with you that you do not support each other, so that some of you support others in this vast place? Rather, they are today submissive to the command of Allah, until He permits them to intercede."
20,"وقيل: تسألهم الخزنة: \"" ألم يأتكم نذير رسل منكم \""، (رسل) بالبينات قالوا بلى ولكن حقت كلمة العذاب على الكافرين.","It is said: ""The keepers will ask them, 'Did not a warner come to you from among yourselves?' They will say, 'Yes, but the word of punishment was justified upon the disbelievers.'"""
21,ويجوز أن يكون هذا السؤال هو قوله بعد ذلك: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} (أي لا تسألون) (توبيخاً لهم فيقال): ما لكم لا يناصرون قال ابن عباس: لا ينصر بعضُكم بعضاً كما كنتم في الدنيا وذلك أن أبا جهل قال يوم بدر: نحْن جميعٌ منتصر فقيل لهم يوم القيامة: ما لكم لا تَنَاصَرُون، وقيل: يقال للكفار: ما لشركائكم لا يمنعونكم من العذاب.,"It is possible that this question is what follows: {What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?} (meaning, do not ask) (as a rebuke to them, it is said): What is the matter with you that you do not help each other? Ibn Abbas said: Some of you do not help others as you did in the world. This is because Abu Jahl said on the day of Badr: We are a united group, avenging. So it was said to them on the Day of Resurrection: What is the matter with you that you do not help each other? And it was said: It is said to the disbelievers: What is the matter with your partners that they do not protect you from the punishment?"
22,"قوله: \"" مَا لَكُمْ \"" يجوز أن يكون منقطعاً عما قبله والمسؤول عنه غير مذكور ولذلك قدره بعضهم عن أعمالهم، ويجوز أن يكون هو المسؤول عنه في المعنى فيكون معلقاً للسؤال و \"" لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ \"" جملة حالية العامل فيها الاستقرار في \"" لكم \"".","His saying: ""What is the matter with you?"" It is possible that it is disconnected from what came before it, and the thing being asked about is not mentioned. Therefore, some have interpreted it as referring to their deeds. It is also possible that it is the thing being asked about in meaning, so it would be a suspension of the question, and ""you do not help one another"" is a circumstantial clause whose verb is the stability in ""with you."""
23,وقيل: سؤالهم أن يقال لهم: {أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِّنْكُمْ} [الأنعام: 130] إقامة للحجة.,"It was said: Their question is that it is said to them: ""Did not Messengers come to you from among yourselves?"" [Al-An'am: 130] as an establishment of the argument."
24,ويقال لهم: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} على جهة التقريع والتوبيخ أي ينصر بعضكم بعضاً فيمنعه من عذاب الله.,"It is said to them: ""Why do you not help each other?"" as a reproach and rebuke, meaning, why does not one of you help the other and prevent him from Allah's punishment."
25,وقيل: عن ولاية علي بن أبي طالب ع عن أبي سعيد الخدري وعن سعيد بن جبير عن ابن عباس مرفوعاً حدثناه عن الحاكم أبي القاسم الحسكاني بالإسناد يقال: وقفت أنا ووقفت غيري وبعض بني تميم يقول: أوقفت الدابة والدار وأنشد الفراء: تَرىَ النَّاسَ ما سِرْنا يَسِيرُونَ خَلْفَنا وَإنْ نَحْــنُ أوْمَـأْنا إلَى النَّاسِ أوْقَفُوا {ما لكم لا تناصرون} أي لا تتناصرون وهذا على وجه التوبيخ والتبكيت أي ما لكم لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً في دفع العذاب والتقدير ما لكم غير متناصرين.,"It was said: about the authority of Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him), from Abu Sa'id al-Khudri, and from Sa'id ibn Jubayr from Ibn Abbas, it was raised, we narrated it from Al-Hakim Abu al-Qasim al-Haskani with the chain of narration. It is said: I stood, and others stood, and some of the Banu Tamim said: I stopped the beast and the house. Al-Farra' recited: ""You see people, when we walk, they walk behind us, and if we gesture to the people, they stop."" {What is the matter with you that you do not help one another?} meaning, you do not help one another. This is in the form of reproach and condemnation, meaning, what is the matter with you that you do not help one another in warding off the punishment? And the meaning is, what is the matter with you, not helping one another."
26,25 - ما لكم - أيها المشركون - لا ينصر بعضكم بعضا كما كنتم تتناصرون فى الدنيا؟!,"25 - Why do you not help each other, O polytheists, as you used to help each other in the world?"
27,وكلكم في حاجة إلى الناصر والمعين؟,And all of you are in need of a helper and supporter?
28,قوله - تعالى - {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} تقريع آخر لهم، أى ما الذى جعلكم فى هذا اليوم عاجزين عن التناصر فيما بينكم - أيها الكافرون - مع أنكم فى الدنيا كنتم تزعمون أنكم جميع منتصر؟,"His - the Exalted - saying, ""What is the matter with you that you do not help one another?"" is another rebuke to them, meaning, ""What has made you, on this day, unable to help one another among yourselves - O disbelievers - when in the world you used to claim that you were all victorious?"""
29,ما لكم لا تناصرون: أي ما لكم لا ينصر بعضكم بعضا كما كنتم في الدنيا توبيخا لهم.,"What is the matter with you that you do not help one another, as you used to do in the world, as a rebuke to them."
30,ويقول {وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَّسْئُولُونَ} ثم يسألون {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} أي لا ينصر بعضكم بعضا كما كنتم في الدنيا.,"And He will say, ""Halt them, for they are to be questioned."" Then they will be asked, ""Why do you not help each other as you used to do in the world?"""
31,لا تَناصرون: لا تتناصرون، لا ينصر بعضكم بعضا.,"Do not support each other: do not support each other, do not help each other."
32,ويقال لهم {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ؟} لا ينصر بعضكم بعضا كما كنتم في الدنيا تفعلون!,"It is said to them, ""Why do you not help each other as you used to do in the world?"""
33,وقوله: {مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ}.,"""His saying: 'Why do you not help each other?'"""
34,أي: ما لكم لا تنصرون؟,What is the matter with you that you do not help?
35,{(25) مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَنَاصَرُونَ} لا ينصر بعضكم بعضاً بالتخليص وهو توبيخ وتقريع.,"""What is the matter with you that you do not help one another?"" None of you help each other to be saved, and this is a rebuke and reproach."
