,original_sentence,translation
0,فالحاصل أنه لا تفيد معهم البراهين الضرورية ولا المقدمات الوعظية ولا المعجزات الدالة على صدق إخبارك بالبعث.,"The result is that neither necessary proofs, nor preaching premises, nor miracles indicating the truth of your news about the resurrection, are of any benefit to them."
1,وقيل: أراد أنهم يتيقنون دوامه لا كرزق الدنيا الذي لا يعلم متى يحصل ومتى يقطع.,"It was said: He meant that they are certain of its permanence, not like the sustenance of this world, which one does not know when it will come and when it will be cut off."
2,قوله: (وتقول لهم الملائكة) أشار بذلك إلى أن الوقف تم عند قوله: {يٰوَيْلَنَا} وما بعده كلام مستقبل، وهذا أحد احتمالات، ويحتمل أنه من كلام بعضهم لبعض، ويحتمل أنه من كلام الله تعالى تبكيتاً لهم، ويحتمل أنه من كلام المؤمنين لهم.,"He says: ""(And the angels will say to them)"" By this, he indicated that the pause occurred at His saying: ""{Woe to us!}"" and what follows is future speech. This is one of the possibilities, and it is possible that it is the speech of some of them to each other, and it is possible that it is the speech of Allah, the Exalted, to rebuke them, and it is possible that it is the speech of the believers to them."
3,قيل: لأن هذا توبيخ وتقريع فكان نوعاً من العذاب فلذلك صار بعد الأمر بالعذاب.,"It was said: Because this is a rebuke and a reprimand, it was a kind of torment, so it became after the commandment of torment."
4,وقيل: ما كذَّبوا به.,It was said: They did not believe in it.
5,فهذا مما لا ينبغي أن يصدق.,This is not something that should be believed.
6,والمعنى ولولا توفيق ربي وهدايته لكنت من المحضرين للعذاب مثلك.,"And the meaning is, ""But for the success and guidance of my Lord, I would have been among those brought forth to punishment, like you."""
7,واعلم أن لهم أقوالاً مختلفة في نسبة أكثر الجمل السابقة إلى قول الله تعالى أو قول الملائكة أو قول أهل الجنة غير القائل المذكور والذي أوردناه هو الذي يساعد عليه السياق.,"Know that there are different opinions regarding the attribution of most of the previous statements to the saying of God Almighty, the saying of the angels, or the saying of the people of Paradise, other than the one mentioned. The one we have mentioned is the one that the context supports."
8,ولو حكى الوعيد على ما هو لقال: إنكم لذائقون، لكنه عدل به إلى لفظ المتكلم لأنهم يتكلّمون بذلك على أنفسهم.,"And if the threat were told as it is, it would say: ""Indeed, you will taste [punishment],"" but it was changed to the word of the speaker because they speak of it in relation to themselves."
9,وقيل: بل هو كلام الملائكة.,"It is said: Rather, it is the speech of the angels."
10,ويقول ذاك لم قبلت مني.,"He says, ""Why did you accept from me?"""
