,original_sentence,translation
0,والتاليات الذين يتلون كتاب الله على الأبنياء.,And those who recite the Book of Allah to the prophets.
1,وأما التاليات فذلك أنهم يشتغلون وقت المحاربة بقراءة القرآن وذكر الله.,"As for the latter, it is that they occupy themselves during the time of fighting with reciting the Quran and remembering Allah."
2,وعنه: الكتبة من الملائكة.,"""As for him: the scribes among the angels."""
3,وكما أن الضمير في {قالوا} الأول كان عائداً إلى الأتباع بقرينة الخطاب، فالضمير في {قالوا} الثاني يعود إلى الرؤساء لمثل تلك القرينة.,"And just as the pronoun in the first {they said} refers to the followers by the context of the speech, the pronoun in the second {they said} refers to the leaders by the same context."
4,والأوّلون حملوه على المبالغة.,And the first ones took it as an exaggeration.
5,وبنـحو الذي قلنا فـي ذلك قال أهل التأويـل.,"And similarly to what we have said about that, the people of interpretation have said."
6,وبنـحو الذي قلنا فـي ذلك قال أهل التأويـل.,"And similarly to what we have said about that, the people of interpretation have said."
7,قال والمفسرون على القول الأوّل.,"He said, and the exegetes are on the first saying."
8,وقال ابن كيسان والأَصَمّ: قدموهم والعرب تسمي السابق هادياً.,"And Ibn Kisān and Al-Aṣamm said: ""Bring them forward,"" and the Arabs call the one who is ahead a guide."
9,قال ابن عباس: عن أقوالهم وأفعالهم.,Ibn Abbas said: About their sayings and deeds.
10,وعنه أيضاً: عن ظلم الخلق.,About him also: about the oppression of creation.
11,وقد مضى في «الحجر» الكلام فيه.,"It has already been discussed in ""Al-Hijr."""
12,ٱبن عباس: خاضعون ذليلون.,Son of Abbas: Humble and submissive.
13,وهذا بيّن لأن قبله «فَلاَ أَنْسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ».,"This is clear because before it is: ""Then there will be no kinships among them."""
14,وعن ٱبن عباس نحو منه.,"And from Ibn Abbas, something similar."
15,وهذا قول ٱبن عباس.,This is the saying of Ibn Abbas.
16,وقال ابن كيسان: قدّموهم.,"He said, ""Bring them forward."""
17,والعرب تسمى السابق هادياً.,The Arabs call the first one a guide.
18,وقوله: {دُحُوراً} قيل: طرداً، وهو مطرود.,"His saying: {Duhurun} was said: expulsion, and he is expelled."
19,و {لَهُمْ} ضمير يعود على ما يفهم من الكلام وهم ذرية آدم صلى الله عليه وسلم.,"And {to them} is a pronoun that refers to what is understood from the speech, and they are the descendants of Adam, peace be upon him."
20,"قال ابن عطية: وأجمعين تأكيد وفيه معنى الحال \"" انتهى \"".","Ibn Attiyah said: ""And all of them is an emphasis, and it has the meaning of the state 'ended'."""
21,وعن ابن عباس على سرر مكللة بالياقوت والزبرجد والدر.,"""And from Ibn Abbas, 'On thrones adorned with rubies, emeralds, and pearls.'"""
22,وقوله: {كلُّهم أجمعون} قال فيه سيبويه والخليل: هو توكيد بعد توكيد.,"His saying: {All of them, together} - Sibawayh and Al-Khalil said about it: It is an emphasis after an emphasis."
