{ لم تعبد ما لا يسمع ولا يبصر } مما سوى الله من الأكوان التي تطلبها وتنسب التأثير إليها { ولا يغني عنك شيئاً } في الحقيقة لعدم تأثيره . { قد جاءني من العلم } أي : التوحيد الذاتي { سلام عليك } أي : جرّد الله ذاتك عن المواد التي احتجبت بها { سأستغفر لك ربّي } سأطلب منه ستر ذاتك بنوره ومحو غشاوات صفاتك بصفاته ، ودناءة هيئات نفسك بأفعاله إن أمكن { إنه كان مخلصاً } بالكسر ، أي مجرّداً ذاته وعلمه في السلوك لوجه الله لم يلتفت إلى ما سواه من وجهة حتى صفاته تعالى ، بل نفاها عن ذاته ، وهو { مَا زَاغَ ٱلْبَصَرُ وَمَا طَغَىٰ } بقوله : { أَرِنِيۤ أَنظُرْ إِلَيْكَ } [ الأعراف ، الآية : 143 ] . ومخلصاً بالفتح ، أي : أخلصه الله عن أنانيته وأفنى البقية منه فخلص من الطغيان المذكور بالتجلي الذاتي التام ، واستقام بتمكين الله إياه كما قال : { فَلَمَّا تَجَلَّىٰ رَبُّهُ لِلْجَبَلِ جَعَلَهُ دَكّاً وَخَرَّ موسَىٰ صَعِقاً فَلَمَّآ أَفَاقَ قَالَ سُبْحَانَكَ تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ } [ الأعراف ، الآية : 143 ] من ذنب ظهور الأنانية { وكان رسولاً نبيّاً } مقام الرسالة دون مقام النبوّة لكونها مبينة للأحكام كالحلال والحرام ، منبه على الأوضاع كالصلاة والصيام فهي متعلقة ببيان أحكام المكلفين . وأما النبوّة فهي عبارة عن الإنباء عن المعاني الغيبية كأحوال المعاد والبعث والنشور والمعارف الإلهية كتعريف الصفات والأسماء وما يليق بالله من التحميدات والتمجيدات والولاية فوقهما جميعاً لكونها عبارة عن الفناء في ذات الله من غير اعتبار الخلق فهي أشرف المقامات لكونها تتقدم عليهما لأنها ما لم تحصل أولاً لم تمكن النبوّة ولا الرسالة لكونها مقوّمة إياهما ولهذا قدم كونه مخلصاً في القرآن بالفتح ، وأخرت النبوة عن الرسالة لكونها أشرف وأدل على المدح والتعظيم منها ولم يؤخر الولاية عنهام باعتبار الشرف لأنها وإن كانت أشرف لكنها باطنة لا يعرف شرفها وفضلها إلا الأفراد من العرفاء المحققين المخصوصين بدقة النظر دون غيرهم فلا يفيد المدح والتعظيم ولا الاقتصار عليها بقوله مخلصاً وإن كانت أشرف لأنها قد توجد بدونهما بخلاف العكس ، فلا يحسن وصفه إلا على هذا الترتيب . وناديناه من جانب الطور الأيمن أي : طور وجوده الذي هو نهاية طور القلب في مقام السرّ الذي هو محل المناجاة ، ولذا قال : { وقربناه نجيّاً } وسمي كليم الله . وإنما وصفه بالأيمن الذي هو الأشرف والأقوى والأكثر بركة احترازاً عن جانبه الأيسر الذي هو الصدر ، لأن الوحي إنما يأتي من عالم الروح الذي هو الوادي المقدس .

"{You do not worship that which does not hear or see} other than Allah among the entities that you seek and attribute influence to {and it does not benefit you} in reality due to its lack of influence. {Knowledge has come to me} meaning: the unity of the self {Peace be upon you} meaning: May Allah purify your essence from the materials that have veiled it {I will seek forgiveness for you from my Lord} I will ask Him to conceal your essence with His light and erase the veils of your attributes with His attributes, and the baseness of your self's forms with His actions, if possible. {Indeed, he was sincere} with a kasra, meaning he purified his self and knowledge in the path towards Allah, not turning to anything else, not even His attributes, but rather removed them from his self. And he is {whose sight did not swerve, nor did it transgress} by saying: {Show me, that I may look at You} [Al-A'raf, Verse 143]. And sincere with a fatha, meaning: Allah purified him from his ego and annihilated the remainder of him, thus he was saved from the mentioned transgression through the complete divine manifestation, and he stood upright by Allah's empowerment of him, as He said: {And when his Lord appeared to the mountain, He made it crumble to dust, and Moses fell unconscious. Then when he recovered, he said, "Exalted are You! I have turned to You in repentance} [Al-A'raf, Verse 143] from the sin of the ego's appearance. {And he was a messenger, a prophet} the station of messengership is below the station of prophethood because it clarifies the rulings like the permissible and the forbidden, alerting to the conditions like prayer and fasting, which are related to explaining the rulings for the accountable. As for prophethood, it is the conveyance of the unseen meanings like the states of the afterlife, resurrection, and the divine knowledge like the explanation of the attributes and names, and what is befitting for Allah of praises and glorifications, and the guardianship above all of them because it is the annihilation in the essence of Allah without considering the creation. Thus, it is the noblest of stations because it precedes them both, for if it does not occur first, neither prophethood nor messengership can be established, as it is their foundation. Therefore, his being sincere in the Qur'an with a fatha was mentioned first, and prophethood was placed after messengership because it is nobler and more indicative of praise and glorification than it. And guardianship was not placed after them in terms of nobility because, although it is nobler, it is hidden, and its nobility and virtue are known only to the individuals among the true knowers who are distinguished by the keenness of their insight, unlike others. Thus, praise and glorification do not benefit, nor does limiting to it with the statement "sincere" even if it is nobler, because it can exist without them, unlike the reverse. Therefore, describing him is only appropriate in this order. And we called him from the side of the right mount, meaning: the mount of his existence, which is the end of the mount of the heart in the station of the secret, which is the place of intimate discourse. Therefore, He said: {And We brought him near as a confidant} and named him the one who speaks with Allah. And he was described as the right, which is the nobler, stronger, and more blessed, as a precaution from his left side, which is the chest, because revelation comes only from the world of the spirit, which is the sacred valley."